# The Home Planet - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 5

good morning interweb world builders log
five
today we are going to start work on our
habitable planet but first as always
some follow-up
first up the apparent size and
brightness tab has a critical error in
it shout out to the people who spotted
it
such that as it currently stands any
section below this banner here is kind
of useless don't use it i've been
struggling for like a week or so to try
and get it fixed
and i've been failing miserably so
astronomers any astronomers in comments
will you send me an email i could really
do with talking to someone in the know
on this and hopefully with a
professional's help we can get this
sorted apologies everyone and i will let
you know
when this is updated and fixed but again
for now do not use any of
these sections next up i made an
all-fair change to the planetary system
that we were building in the previous
video nothing major all i did was get
rid of this rocky planet here to keep to
our original two rocky planets and two
gas giants idea and move it into the
asteroid belt make it become a dwarf
planet much like ceres in our asteroid
belt the reference dock has been updated
check out patreon links in the
description to get your hands on this we
now have an updated planetary system map
with our little dwarf planet in the
asteroid belt and our little pluto
analog out in the kuiper belt we also
have some updated galaxy artwork which i
think just looks
so great
and we have an updated stellar
neighborhood page again
loving this map here and also a section
on the various attributes of each of the
systems we created
in our stellar neighborhood again if
you're interested in getting your hands
on this doc head on over to patreon all
right those are the updates a bit of
follow-up from the last episode daniel
bamberger shout out
making a triumphant return i did in fact
misunderstand what you were saying about
the asteroid belts so it doesn't
actually impact the build we did in the
previous video but for anyone interested
in exactly how to play with multiple
asteroid belts just pause here check out
this comment i finally get it now
i did not get it before so thanks
everyone for the continued feedback
now without further ado let us crack on
to our planet so the first thing to
consider is mass density radius and
gravity in my opinion the four most
important parameters when it comes to
constructing planets mass pretty
self-explanatory it's how massive the
planet is the range for terrestrial
planets is about 0.1 to 10 earth masses
though for habitable terrestrial planets
the range is a bit smaller about 0.1 to
3.5 earth masses
and the reason being that some
scientists think that the more you
increase the mass the more plate
tectonics are suppressed and having
active plate tectonics is really
important because they're an important
geochemical process that informs
habitability so if your habit world is
in the 0.1 to 3.5 earth mass range you
should be good next up density again
very self-explanatory this is how dense
your planet is
for me this is the most important
characteristics to determine like we're
building a habitable world right so we'd
like it to have a an iron core
so that the planet can have a magnetic
field so it has shielding from charred
solar radiation we'd also like it to
have a molten silicate mantle upon which
our plates
can move therefore we would need to give
our planet a density that reflects those
materials
now silicate rock has a density of about
3 grams per centimeter cubed pure iron
has a density of about 8 grams per
centimeter cubed i think the actual
value is like seven point eight seven
point nine so for habitual worlds we'll
need to choose a density inside that
range three grams per centimeter cubed
to eight grams per centimeter cubed and
you'll see earth is in that range earth
is 5.51 grams per centimeter cubed
indicating a composition of iron and
silicates next up radius again very
self-explanatory for habitable worlds
you're looking at about 0.5 earth radii
to about 1.5 earth radii and gravity
again very self-explanatory it's the
force of gravity as felt on the planet
measured in g's so relative to earth for
habitable planets you're looking at a
range about 0.4 to 1.6 g now to be
absolutely clear
that's if you want humans involved
if you're creating a habitable world
without any humans involved these ranges
can be
extended but i want humans involved so
i'm going to try and stick to the 0.4 to
1.6 g range
so before i plug in some numbers here i
like to kind of ask myself do i want a
high g world or do i want a low g world
relative to earth high g worlds may have
smaller creatures
with the opposite being true for low g
worlds
the creatures on hygiene worlds may have
fewer
thicker legs
relative to earth and again the opposite
is true for lg worlds
this isn't a hard and fast rule but just
a kind of tendency that you can choose
to go with or ignore and finally on a
hydro world flight may be easier
on a logy world
flight may also be easier reason being
that you could argue a thicker
atmosphere on a high g world so more
atmospheric density then can mean easier
flight on a low g world you have less
gravity to fight against so again easier
flight so taking all that into
consideration i think i'm going to go
with a high g world i put out a twitter
poll last week and by far and away the
super majority voted for low g
so i think i'm going to go against
popular opinion here mainly because i
think low g worlds are kind of being
kind of sort of done to death like any
sort of fiction set on the moon or mars
for example is a low g setting james
cameron's avatar that's a low g setting
because it's on a moon of a gas giant
and i'm sure there's a bunch of other
examples but i can't actually think of a
good example of a high g world that
immediately springs to mind so for that
reason i think i'm going to go against
what the super majority vote for sorry
guys i'm going to plug and choke here
see can i achieve a high g world while
maintaining a density that's conducive
to habitability uh time lapse engaged
i'll see you in a few seconds
all right for now something like this so
we got a chunky boy here mass is 2.7
times the mass of earth
density is still relatively comparable
to earth just slightly more so i'd
expect there's a there's a slightly
bigger iron core
radius 34 greater and gravity is about
50 stronger on this world than it is on
earth i think for now i'm
i'm happy with that next up escape
velocity this isn't going to play too
much role for me but for people who are
doing like an interstellar
sort of setting it could play a role
escape velocity is basically how fast
you need to be traveling in order to
escape the gravitational pull of the
planet the higher the escape velocity
the faster you need to be traveling the
more expensive space flight is
like i said not bothered too much with
that one so that's cool next up axial
tilt
axial tilt boy do i have a long and
sordid history with axial tilt my old
nemesis
so the values here range from 0 to 180
degrees i actually think it's a little
bit easier to explain uh with diagrams
so give me one second gonna make some
diagrams right so here we have a planet
and a star this is the planet when it's
say we'll call it january and then this
is the planet six months later in we'll
call it june as it currently stands the
world has zero degrees of axial tilt
because we draw a line from the center
of the planet to the center of the star
and its rotational axis
the axis about which the planet spins is
perpendicular
to that plane and it's rotating in the
same direction as the parent star ergo
just by definition we call that zero
degrees of axial tilt
and obviously with respect to the same
reference frame now on a world with zero
degrees of axial tilt there will be no
seasons as you can hopefully see from
this diagram
the situation in january looks the exact
same as the situation in june
the most direct sunlight is at the
equator the least direct sunlight is up
near the poles
same deal six months later or half a
year later no change therefore no
seasons
in order for
a world to have seasons it must have an
axial tilt
greater than zero
so for earth earth's axial tilt is about
23.5 degrees
which looks a little something like this
so now what's happening is that in
january the southern hemisphere is
pointed towards the sun
therefore it receives the most direct
sunlight
and half a year later in june the
northern hemisphere is pointed towards
the sun therefore it receives the most
direct sunlight
giving us
seasons
note that the direction of the spin is
still generally in the same direction as
the parent star this is called pro-grade
motion by the way and also note that
because of a non-zero axial tilt there
are regions on the planet that
experience constant day and constant
night
so for example in january here if you're
standing near the pole and you're
rotating around this axis here you're
never going to come in contact the sun
ergo it's constant nighttime up at the
poles
in the northern hemisphere in january
half a year later if you're up at the
pole here and again the planet is
spinning around this axis you are always
going to be in sunlight you're never
going to be out of sunlight so you have
constant day
again a phenomenon that only occurs
if a world has some degree of axial tilt
the more we increase the axial tissue
let's say we go up to 40 degrees of
axial tilt like so the same phenomenon
hold it's just that seasonality is more
pronounced
the further you go away from zero
degrees of axial tilt the more
seasonality a planet will experience
now weird things start to happen above
about 45 degrees of axial tilt like at
about 54 degrees of axial tilt the poles
will receive more solar radiation
averaged out throughout the year than
the equator which is the opposite
situation of what happens on earth and
the seasons will be like extremely
pronounced but a stable climate state
with an ice cap limited to the
equatorial region is unlikely which is
just like incredibly weird and advanced
so i would just not go near high
obliquity it's called worlds
i would argue to keep your axial tilt
below 45 degrees
but for brave
if we go to 90 degrees of axial tilt we
get to like weird territory namely if
you notice the spin the spin isn't
spinning in the same direction as the
parent star it's actually perpendicular
again with respect to this reference
frame by convention we say that the spin
of the planet then is undefined at
precisely 90 degrees of axial tilt the
planet's spin is undefined it is neither
in the same direction as the parent star
nor the opposite direction because it's
perpendicular worlds with 90 degrees of
axial tilt are just hella weird now if
we go beyond 90 degrees of axial tilt
like let's say we go to
156.5
we see that the spin of the planet now
with respect to this reference frame is
in the opposite direction to the parent
star so the planet is said to be
spinning retrograde and the kind of cool
consequence of this is that
sunsets and sunrises will be reversed so
on a pro-grade planet the sun will rise
in the east and set in the west however
those are defined and on a retrograde
spinning planet it'll do the opposite
it'll rise in the west and set in the
east and then finally if we go all the
way up to 180 degrees of axial tilt
we're basically back where we started
perpendicular to the plane between the
center of the planet and the center of
the sun
except the spin is now retrograde so
there's no difference between a planet
with zero degrees of axial tilt and 180
degrees of axial tilt except for the
spin direction so
to summarize all of that
zero degrees of axial tilt pro grade
spin
no seasons 100 degrees of axial tilt
retrograde spin no seasons as we move
away from zero and 180 degrees
seasonality is introduced the more we
move away the stronger the seasons above
45-ish degrees weird things happen to
the climate be very careful if you
choose to go down that road
and at exactly 90 degrees of axial tilt
the planet's spin is undefined because
its direction is perpendicular to the
spin of the star god i hope that all
made sense actually this is just such a
nightmare to try and explain anywho so
what sort of actual tip do i want from
my planet so i'll keep a pro great spin
for now we can change it later if we
want so that means i'm choosing axial
tilt between 0 and 90 degrees i want
seasonality so it has to be greater than
zero
and and realistically i kind of want to
keep it almost earth-like because again
the more you deviate the less and less
modern-day climate zones will apply to a
planet so i am going to just
maybe just vary this by a degree or two
uh maybe two degrees maybe like 21
21 degrees maybe so it's almost like
earth except seasonality is ever so
slightly reduced things are just ever so
slightly more mellow but by and large
still are like thus meaning that i can
draw on modern day climate zones like i
said direction is prograde cool spins in
the same direction as its apparent star
with respect to the same reference frame
our world's tropics i.e the area bounded
by the equivalent of the tropic of
cancer and tropic of capricorn go from
21 degrees south to 21 degrees north on
our world and in this region there will
be at least one day per year where the
sun is directly overhead now that is
what defines the tropics
i.e in this region it's hella hot
our polar circles
go from 69 to 90 degrees north and south
these are the hella cold regions
and within these regions serve at least
one day per year where the sun will
either never set or never rise
okay next up rotation period basically
how long is a day on a planet uh lots to
unpack here as well so bear with me in
general
the faster a planet rotates i.e the
shorter its day is the more evenly
heated that planet will be
conversely the slower a planet rotates
i.e the longer its day is the less even
the heating of the planet will be so if
you imagine a planet that's spinning
infinitely fast
it's not possible but just go with me
any given point on the surface of the
planet when it comes in contact with the
sun's rays
that point won't have a chance to heat
up very much because the rapid spin will
take it out of the sun's rays really
quickly similarly it also won't have
much time to cool down when it's not
being directly hit by the sun's rays
because the spin will drag it back under
the sun's rays again very rapidly such
that that point never gets like
extremely hot nor extremely cool it's
just an even sort of heating and that
applies for all points on the planet now
if you imagine a planet that spins like
infinitely slowly any given point on the
surface of that planet will be under
sun's rays for like a hella long time
and will continue to heat up and heat up
and heat up becoming just incredibly hot
and when the spin takes that point out
of the path of the sun's rays it will
have a long long long time to cool down
because of how slow the planet is
spinning so that point on the planet
goes from the extremes of being cooked
to a crisp when in contact with the
sun's rays to being frozen solid
when it's not in contact with the sun's
rays a very uneven heating of the planet
occurs
again i hope that makes sense fast spin
even heating slow spin
uneven heating another relevant point is
that spin informs what the atmosphere is
doing
the slower the spin the less circulation
cells in the atmosphere the faster the
spin
the more circulation cells by and large
again this will play a role in climate
sulfur earth-like worlds we'd like to
try and have three circulation cells
like on our planet the hadley cell in
the tropics the feral cell in the
temperate zone and the polar cell in the
arctic
and antarctics we'd like three cells per
hemisphere so we'd like to pick a spin
that gives us three cells per hemisphere
very roughly this means that the sort of
habitable range for rotation periods
here is about 6 to 48 earth hours
but
but it's worth considering
why you're world building here like if
you're just world building for you
as a sort of like intellectual hobby or
whatever go mad 6 to 48 choose anything
you want
if you're world building
for an audience like you're writing a
book a game etc
i'd be very reticent to mess with
people's concept of time
like for example let's say you make a
world and it's got a three hour day
right it rotates really really quickly
and your protract your protagonist is a
skilled baker say
you're writing a story about them and
you include a line that says
protagonists spent
all day baking a small cake
which sounds you know really
unimpressive for a skilled bakeries but
you spend 24 hours
baking a small cake i thought you're
good at baking cakes and then you
remember oh wait no a day on this planet
is three hours so they actually just
spent three earth hours baking cake
which is about normal
see what i mean so like if you want
people to engage with your work i'd
consider keeping the rotation period
quite literally what
earth is so you're not constantly asking
people to do mental arithmetic to
convert between what we think an hour
and a day is and what an hour and a day
is on your world
so that's what i'm going to do i'm just
going to hold it at 24 earth hours for
now when we do calendar building stuff i
i might move around depending but yeah
for now i'm going to stick with this so
there's no confusion about time and no
one has to do mental arithmetic to
convert
all right that's rotation period now
albedo greenhouse effect and surface
temperature we looked at in a previous
video so don't need to look at them
distance to horizon this is this is kind
of not very useful it's just a fun
little bit of flavor text you can use
you can put the height of an observer
here so like
technically it's the height from the
ground to the eye level of the observer
but really just putting your height
there for americans six foot is about
1.83
meters so i'm about 1.75 so if i were to
stand on the surface of this planet i
could see a distance of 5.48 kilometers
which is more than earth now this does
not take into account atmospheric
refraction and all that sort of jazz
this is kind of just a very loose sense
of how far you can see
um not that important but like i said
fun flavor text
and now we're on to the trusty planet
orbital characteristics we already know
the semi-major axis of our planet's
orbit because we built a planetary
system there the feather is but we have
not yet worked out any of this section
so let's do that eccentricity orbital
eccentricity is a value that goes from
zero to one and it marks out how
elliptical an orbit is all orbits are
elliptical that's just like a law it's
one of kepler's laws therefore all
orbits have to be greater than zero or
less than one at zero the orbit is a
perfect circle that's not allowed and at
one the orbit is a parabola so it's not
orbiting at all it'd be like a flyby
sort of thing so it has to be less than
one orbital eccentricity of any planet
should be greater than zero and less
than one and on top of that it should be
really really really close to zero
because most major planets orbit on near
circles they're still ellipses but
they're nearly circled so a very very
small eccentricity fyi this is earth's
eccentricity 0.0167
so again very close to zero the
spreadsheet then takes that eccentricity
applies it to the semi-major axis to
figure out how close your planet comes
to the star known as perihelion or
periapsis
and how far away your planet gets from
the star known as aphelion or apoapsis
and the key thing here is that for
habitable worlds at no point should your
world get out of the habitable zone so
for example our habitable zone goes from
4.1 au to 2au roughly
and even if our planet is at its closest
or at its most distant it will still
always be in that zone because again
dipping out of the habitable zone can
lead to issues with habitability so try
and keep everything inside the habitable
zone i'm going to mess with this for a
second just to get some other spread i
think i might reduce the eccentricity to
just again metal things out so there's
less of a temperature extreme between
when the planet is close to the star and
further away time lapse engaged
there you go something like that so the
closest my planet gets is 1.67 au the
furthest away it gets is 1.70 au on
average
its distance is 1.69 that's the
definition of kind of a semi-major axis
now i didn't plan this but the orbital
period like how long it takes to
complete its orbit i.e a year on this
world is almost exactly two earth years
again not planned but kind of happy
little coincidence
1.98 years aka 726
earth days
again i'm not too pushed about these
exact numbers they're cool i'm fine with
it
onwards inclination so inclination again
this is another one that's a little bit
complicated to explain i mean
it's easy in the sense of like for a
habitable world it's zero period but
there's a little bit more nuance to it
so i think it's graphics time hold on
give me two seconds all right here we go
we got a star we got a planetary system
orbiting said star
and this thing here this is the center
of the galaxy a couple of different ways
we can measure inclination here we can
draw a line between the center of the
star and the center of the galaxy let's
just call that the galactic pain for the
sake of it
and we can measure the angle between the
galactic plane and the plane of the
orbit of a given planet
and call that
the planet's inclination so respect to
the galactic plane
green planet here is inclined x degrees
same thing with orange planet we could
do something like
this
and it would have this inclination and
for blue planet same thing again
and it would have that inclination you
can do that totally fine but what i
would suggest doing is taking your
habitual world say this guy
and just setting its inclination to zero
degrees
that means we're defining the plane of
its orbit as being the baseline from
which we're going to measure the
inclination of all the other planets so
orange planet here is going to be
inclined x degrees
with respect to the habitable world's
orbital plane
same thing
for blue planet here big inclined y
degrees with respect to that orbital
plane so set the habitable world's
orbital inclination to zero degrees and
then all other planets give them an
inclination with respect to the hablo
world's orbital plane now in general uh
planetary systems tend to be a little
bit like uh like pizza you know when
people spin pizza dough like they throw
it up in the air and they spin it that
spin causes the pizza to flatten you can
think of planetary systems as being like
that they are spinning so we'd expect
the planets to be
fairly flat with respect to the star i
we wouldn't expect like really highly
inclined
orbital eccentricities at least for the
major inner planets of the system so i
would say for inclinations that aren't
your habitable world
maybe less than 10 degrees is probably
the way to go so you get that like flat
planetary system all right again i hope
that made sense
zero degrees i'm gonna do that i'm just
gonna define i'm defining basically the
ecliptic you could do that if you want
that's what defines ecliptic so zero
degrees for our habit world and because
we're between much like axial tilt
between zero and 90 degrees we have a
pro grade spin so that means our habit
world orbits in the same direction as
the spin of the star which is what you
want if you were to go above 90 degrees
between 90 degrees and 180 degrees you
would get
a retrograde orbit which is
weird and i wouldn't do it for
inner system planets
you'd save that for like crazy kuiper
belt objects and things like that all
right so that is orbital characteristics
done that is that is the physical
characteristics and the orbital
characteristics done at least for now
final thing to consider or multiple
thing to consider is the atmospheric
characteristics
now this being a basic calculator the
assumption here is that your atmosphere
is comprised of nitrogen and oxygen
predominantly
exactly like earth's atmosphere if
you're going for some mad mix of
chemicals this is not the spreadsheet
for you so atmospheric pressure this is
the pressure
at sea level measured in atmospheres at
sea level on earth on average we
experience one atmosphere of pressure
now you can choose to change up the
atmospheric pressure but it is based on
the gaseous content
of your atmosphere because like nitrogen
oxygen very cool we love those gases but
at the wrong pressure they could lead to
like nitrogen narcosis and i can't
remember for life be what the equivalent
is for oxygen poisoning so the pressure
needs to be informed by the percentage
of gases in your atmosphere and if we
twiddle on over here sorry this might be
a little bit small for you guys to see
but depending on the content of oxygen
there's a range listed here for
potential atmospheric pressures so let
me go to the oxygen tab here i'm going
to drop this a little bit i'm just going
to say with 20 oxygen say again i'm
keeping things really earth-like but
just tweaking things a little bit so at
20
oxygen
i could have atmospheric pressure at sea
level between
0.48 atmospheres
up to 2.72 atmospheres let me just put
in the max here
and we'll see where we go
so at 2.72 atmospheres at sea level the
atmospheric density on our planet is
3.34 kilograms per meter cubed
on earth the equivalent is about 1.23
kilograms meter cubed so the atmosphere
is a just a little bit less than three
times as dense as it is on earth
that's going to be useful for flying so
i'd like a high atmospheric density so
that's good now next thing to check
is the partial pressure here again
there's bounds you don't need to know
what partial pressure means but there's
bounds on these figures and they tell
you if you have too much of any one gas
in the atmosphere so 20 of my atmosphere
is oxygen leading to a partial pressure
of 0.54 atmospheres
and according to my ranges here that is
not good that falls outside the 0.16 to
0.5 atmosphere range so we're in danger
of poisoning or causing ill effect to
our inhabitants so i am going to
either a decreased oxygen or a decreased
atmospheric pressure let me decrease
the atmospheric pressure a little bit
okay so now we're we're right up there
actually i'm going to decrease it just a
little bit further
yeah maybe
maybe something like that okay so the
partial pressure of oxygen is good no
ill effects will be suffered partial
pressure of carbon dioxide
at optimal should be less than
0.005 which we have we're good
partial pressure of argon
less than 1.6 atmospheres which we have
it's really hard to have the partial
pressure of argon
get into dangerous levels so generally
that's fine and the partial pressure of
nitrogen in our atmosphere
should be less than three atmospheres so
we're good there as well and again we
have a high atmospheric pressure it's
about maybe
2.5 times that of earth at the moment
which is good now the other thing i want
to consider we had mentioned back in a
previous video that our greenhouse
effect on this world needed to be quite
strong so to do that i'm going to ramp
up the amount of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere because if we keep just if we
have just an earth-like level of carbon
dioxide our planet will be seriously
cold so let's just ramp that up so i'm
going to go what happens if we double it
okay we can go a little bit more
that's about as high as i'm going to go
let me just drop that a little bit
something like that yeah i want to be
below 0.005 atmosphere because again for
humans um
above a partial pressure of 0.005 for
carbon dioxide can lead to like um
physiologic physiological effects so
we're still good on the partial
pressures yeah less than three argon's
just always fine that's fine that's fine
as well yeah so far happy with that
here we have our atmospheric circulation
cells we've already taken care of all
this because our rotation period is
exactly like earth it's in the 6 to 48
hour rotation period range we would
expect there to be three cells
circulation cells in the hemisphere
we'll talk more about these in future
videos
just like modern day air so we're gravy
there not a butter and final final thing
is the sky color and the plant color now
there was a version of the spreadsheet
long ago before release of the series
where i like literally created formulae
to um
spit out colored cells to
show the color of
the sky and plants but it was actually
just a much better solution to link to
the this site called panoptes5
great site so let's have a quick gander
at our sky color
all right very pretty there's no way i
could include anything like this in a
spreadsheet shout out to the creator of
panoptes5 i don't know who you are but
you are great so to figure out what our
sky is doing we need to know the spectra
class of our star which i have forgotten
so hold on oh yes it's an f 5.5 star so
if we go back to our color of alien
skies we're basically this let me make
this a little bit bigger for you guys
yeah there we go we are basically this
here
and our atmosphere is what was our
atmosphere again our atmosphere the
pressure of our atmosphere
was 2.3 times so we are closer to this
column here the three atmospheric
pressure column so our sky
will look like this so this circle here
the circles on the left are what happens
when the star is high in the sky
and this is what happens when the star
is low in the sky so that's kind of cool
uh earth but i should say earth this is
earth here roughly somewhere in between
these two cells here is what earth looks
like so our dude here we're looking at a
more sky blue
sky and closer horizon we're looking at
being it a lot whiter
and then at sunset we're looking at kind
of a darker sky overall with more red
hues uh near the horizon so that is kind
of cool that's an unexpected result i
didn't realize we're going to get sort
of a sky blue type color so that's kind
of dope really like it and the final
thing again coming from panoptis 5 is
the color of alien plants
and i'm really disappointed oh no okay
so spectral class we're five point f
five point five so we're somewhere here
we are we're closer to two f six so and
we're closer to three atmospheric
pressures so we're looking at plants
in this if they look kind of green which
is a bit disappointing
i guess you could argue these are more
yellow
and so that's not
great
i'd kind of like them to be this color
here like it'd be cool to have kind of
like turquoisey plants so that means i
need to be closer to one atmosphere
pressure so uh time-lapse engage i'm
going to re-jigger some of the
atmosphere see can i get a color i like
better
yeah maybe something like that
it's sad that i'm losing all this
atmospheric density okay
sure maybe i'll have to dwell on that
okay so
we're closer to one now
than we are to uh
than we are to three so we could buy
this methodology here we could say that
our plants are kind of a turquoisey
color which i kind of like
so that's better what does that do to
our sky color
uh one atmosphere pressure
and we are
we're
basically the same as the sun
basically
um
which
trade-offs here what do i like better do
i like a sky that looks kind of
more alien or plants that look more
alien i think plants are probably the
way to go so we have an earth-like sky
slightly bluer when the sun because
again the sun is roughly this so
slightly bluer when the sun is low in
the horizon
and we have turquoisey turquoisey plants
um which i think is quite cute
all right cool i think that
is
that is that everything for now i think
it is
god that was a lot that was a lot okay
that is that thank you all so much for
watching thank you to all the patrons
for patronizing the channel links in the
description if you want to check it out
and a final shout out as always to the
wonderful vanguard van gogh who is
supplying the artwork for this series
go check them out on deviantart they are
open for commissions so hit them up tell
them i sent you have a great one folks
until next time
edgar out
you