# Plate Tectonics: An Overview - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 9

good morning interweb world Builders log
nine a couple of bits of housekeeping
before we get started one I apologize
for this video taking so long to make
the logic board of my computer
completely died and I was Sans computer
for about two weeks there so I got the
thing repaired it was returned to me and
normal service is resuming now apologies
for the absence number two the reference
dock lots of people were saying that
they'd like access to the reference talk
without having to go to patreon and if
that's what people want who might say
otherwise so there is a link in
description of this video and every
video going forward to the reference Doc
and anytime it's been updated a new
version report in that drive so check
there regularly I will say though that
the reference talk like it isn't cheap
to produce because I'm you know paying
Van Gogh for his work venga Vanguard
resident artists check them out links in
the description and I'm also like you
know paying various other um experts to
come make sure that everything is like
scientifically accurate so like it costs
a fair bit to make so I would please ask
that if you get value from this and the
videos please do consider going over to
patreon it just means that I can keep
producing this and if that's another
thing you can do no worries at all the
link to the Google drive folder is in
the description all right Preamble done
what are we going to do today so today
we are going to start working on our
planet we've finished the star we
finished the planetary system we
finished the Galaxy the Stellar
neighborhood we've worked out the broad
details of our Homeworld and we've
worked out our moon it's high time we
zoom into planet and begin to think
about how it looks in terms of like land
masses climate zones Etc
this process for me it's evolved over
the years it now begins with making a
full tectonic history of my world that
is the simulation of about a billion
years of tectonic Evolution using an app
called G plates
we'll get into that in the next video
essentially this this is what I tend to
do at this stage this is a really long
and cumbersome process so to kind of
maximize time and efficiency here I've
actually reached out to a chap called
World building pasta links in
description to this this is by far the
best world building blog I have ever
come across in terms of like hardcore
realism it is absolutely stunning I
would encourage each and every one of
you to go over there and just Blitz this
site it is amazing I reached out to
World building past and I was like hey
can I commission you to do a tectonic
history for me this I think has two
advantages one it means I can
financially support other creators I
really like always good thing and two it
frees me up to do more kind of teaching
things so the focus of the next couple
of videos won't necessarily be
constructing the planet we've built but
rather talking about like what play
tectonics are what they do and how to go
about simulating them so it'll be more
like to tutorial based and at the end of
This World building pasta will have a
world for me and we can see what the
process will yield which I think just is
really useful working in parallel so
massive thanks World building pasta for
accepting my commission and also for
letting me take a lot of information
that's in the blog and turning it into a
video because if you dear viewer are
like me I tend to learn better from
video than I do from written word so
massive Shout Out World building pasta
thank you so so much all right let's
talk plate tectonics what are they what
do they do how do we simulate them so
any tectonically active Planet will have
its crust its outermost layer or like
its outermost non-atmospheric layer
split into a number of like distinct
chunks that we call plates the crust of
a planet will come in two flavors either
it'll be oceanic crust or continental
crust and the key difference here is
that oceanic crust is thin and dense
whereas continental crust is thicker and
less dense and as a consequence of these
when these interact with one another
various different landforms like you
know mountains volcanoes trenches
earthquakes that sort of thing are
formed depending on what types are
interacting and the main place of
interaction between these various plates
is at the boundaries so knowing about
what the various plate boundaries are
and what goes on with them is really
important so let's start there there's
basically three types of boundary you
have convergent boundaries divergent
boundaries and transform boundaries
convergent boundaries are boundaries
like say for example the Nazca place and
the South American Plate that boundary
here where both plates are moving into
one another the Nazca plate here is
traveling East and the South American
Plate is traveling west they are
converging on one another divergent
boundaries as the name will apply are
plates that are pulling apart so the
prime example here is the South American
Plate and the African Place African
plate is moving East at at least locally
here the South American Plate is moving
West as that means the boundary here is
diverging they're splitting apart and
the final type is transform plate
boundaries example here would be like
the very earthquake prone American
southwest
this is when two plates they are neither
coming together nor pulling apart
they're just like scraping off one
another in this case the Pacific Plate
is moving like Northwest and the North
American Plate is moving like Southeast
they're scraping off one another that's
a transform boundary you can also get
transform boundaries if the two plates
are moving in the same direction but
just at different speeds again producing
that sort of shearing scraping sort of
situation convergent Divergent
transform those are your main types
Within These there's a bunch of subtypes
so here we have a oceanic continental
convergent plate boundary we said that
oceanic crust is denser
so it will tend to sink underneath
continental crust Continental cross will
kind of tend to like ride up high
in this interaction the features we'd
expect along this boundary are a
subduction zone and a and an ocean
trench at that subduction zone a great
example of such trench is found just off
the coast of South America The Last Cafe
is moving This Way South America is
moving that way we have a oceanic
continental collision and we've got this
beautiful
Oceanic trench here also expect
earthquakes
volcanoes and orogeny originally just
means like mountain building
specifically at this type of interaction
you're going to get Andean or laramide
style orogeny these are not like
official geological terms uh they're
World building past this term is but I
find them immensely useful
Andy and erogeny is basically inspired
by the Andes laramyder rajini is
essentially think the Rocky Mountains in
the US we'll talk more about what these
are in a second next up we have Oceanic
Oceanic convergent plate boundaries
again we have a subduction zone and
ocean trenches in this case though the
subducting place it's always denser
plate that will subduct and go under in
this Collision oceanic plates are dense
but they differ in density depending on
age the older place the more depths so
this feather here will be a slightly
older portion of the ocean so it'll get
sucked under and again that's the thing
that when we go to simulate
um plate tectonics we'll be able to
figure out ocean trenches earthquakes
volcanoes and Island arcs so basically
the same thing except there's no land
and a good example of this sort of thing
is in Oceania here ocean plate Ocean
Place we got an ocean trench and some
volcanic island arcs going on and then
we got Continental Continental virgin
boundaries the final type or the final
subtype of convergent boundaries where
two continental plates Bang into one
another expect earthquakes orogeny
mountain building this time of the Ural
or Himalayan type again we'll talk more
about these later and you can also get
some plateaus full disclosure
you can also get plateaus in the lower
mode type as well but again we'll top
all in a second then we have Oceanic
Oceanic divergent boundaries think the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge here Africa is moving
this way at least locally South America
is moving this way meaning here is a
divergent boundary expect earthquakes
volcanoes mid-ocean ridges and volcanic
islands like the likes of Iceland what's
interesting to know because of the
geometry of a sphere
divergent boundaries are like they form
this really cool like geometrical
pattern where you have straight sections
of transform boundaries and then you get
like a Divergent section then a
transform boundary then a Divergent
section Transform boundary and they keep
forming this kind of like staircase sort
of pattern very very indicative of
oceanic Oceanic Divergence
we got the same thing except involving
two components Continental Continental
divergent plate boundary same deal just
two bits of continent rifting apart
expect earthquakes rift valleys and
volcanoes and a sort of canonical IRL
example is the East African Rift Valley
which is like this entire section up
here so that's the two types of
divergent boundary Oceanic Oceanic
divergent boundaries and Continental
Continental divergent boundaries now
you'd think you'd have oceanic
continental divergent boundaries but
that basically never happens because
like if that were to happen it would
really quickly just transition into an
oceanic Oceanic divergent boundary
and then we have transform boundaries
either Continental Continental transform
plate boundaries or Oceanic Oceanic
transform plate boundaries excuse again
the pixelation here expect earthquakes
land deformation and little to no
volcanism because nothing is being
subducted they're just scraping past one
another right so those are the types of
plate boundaries and the features we'd
expect to be associated with them now we
mentioned a bunch of erogeny types so
let's look at that so we can break down
the types of mountains that will form
over various plate boundaries or around
various play boundaries into four types
Andean laramide URL and Himalayan again
not official designations just super
useful for World building purposes you
could think of these as being grouped
into two these two compared and these
two compared these two form as a result
of oceanic continental collisions
and these two form as a result of
consonant consonant equations
one is thin one is wide
one is thin one is wide right so Andean
style erogeny like the Andes occurs when
you have a seduction Zone how long
there's meant to be an a there sorry
when you put the subduction zone along
the coast
again
Proto typically
this is what goes on shock horror around
the Andes this erogeny again tends to be
pretty thin say 80 to 200 kilometers
Laramie rajni whenever I say the word
Laramie just think the Rocky Mountains
this forms as a result of a mid-ocean
ridge subducting
under a continent and yes that's a thing
that can occur and it can also form
actually if the ocean just comes in real
hot like if it's if it's speeding
towards the continent it can also form
then this is like the Andean originate
except much thicker
say 750 to 1 300 kilometers and Pro
typically
this would be the Rockies you can see
it's much much wider than the Andes and
you also get like a bunch of cool
topography going on where you get like
these like ridges and you get these kind
of like basins where land like slumps
down it's it's a whole cool thing with
the Rockies again forms a result of a
mid-ocean ridge being subducted or an
ocean common in heart Eurostar arogeny
consonant consonant collisions
specifically small things like Island
arcs colliding with a continent or
microcontinents something like that give
rise to a fairly thin band of rajini say
500 600 kilometers
and as the name would imply
this type of arogeny looks like the urls
which is somewhere up in here
and then you get Himalayan orogeny
shakhire named after the Himalayas this
is when you get a full-on continent
continent collision and this is the
thick version of the continent continent
collisions say 600 to 1200 I don't know
if it could go more than that either way
thicker than your olds or thicker than
your old style of progeny
and you guessed it
it's like the Himalayas so you got it's
really thick
this orogeny lots of land deformation
extremely irregular topography that kind
of thing all right those are the four
types so in some oceanic continental
collisions and the in laramide thin
thick
continent consonant collisions URL or
Himalayan thin thick and again the
simulation process will reveal to us
which ones to pop wear which we'll do in
the next video all right but let's talk
about how the sort of broad overview of
how we're going to simulate and again
next video will be like the nitpicky
details using the program
this is a six-ish step process which
makes it seem really quick but it I it
really isn't it takes such a long time
but I can't really think of a better way
of doing this we start off with a super
continent we draw in that super
consonant and then we begin to break
that content up we move the pieces
around and we begin to reassemble
another supercontinent supercontinent B
and then we break that up and then at
this point we could declare modern world
now obviously you could keep going like
if you wanted your modern world to be a
supercontinent you could go break up
assembly super content again you could
basically keep going for as long as you
want
and the point of taking the simulation
true at least two supercontinents and
about a billion years of history is to
be able to track where mountains occur
so like mountains that formed around
this stage would become like old
mountains the equivalent of the
Appalachians in our modern world and
mountains are formed in the later stages
it's a post-second supercon will become
the newer Mountain so like the likes of
Andes Himalayas that sort of thing doing
this gives you an accurate
representation of what your world will
look like
I should also mention there's a thing
called the supercontinent cycle which is
what we are emulating here
on Earth it's about 300 to 500 million
years between supercontinents though it
varies and that's why I say a billion
years of simulation is a good call
you're allowing 500 million years for
each super content cycle though again
you convey it help if you so desire that
is the basic overview let's talk
slightly more details
Step One is easy we'll just draw a Big
Blob of land perfect step two the
breakup there's some interesting things
here so when you have a supercontinent
it forms like an insulating layer over
the Earth or at least a portion of the
earth that it covers and it'll be like a
big portion like we're talking like a
quarter of the surface area of the Earth
will be taken up by a supercontinent
assuming you have the same land to Ocean
ratio as Earth there's a lot of
insulation going on underneath this sort
of insulated layer these mantle plumes
will evolve which is kind of like I
guess Columns of like really hot magma
that come up and interact with the crust
they will Dome the crust
dormant upwards to form it upwards and
then eventually fracture it into a very
distinct triple Junction so a t-shaped
fracture not a cross-shaped fracture
always a t-shaped fracture a lot of
these mantle plumes can occur and create
these triple Junctions like this is
rodania by the way uh like here which
was a previous supercontinent on earth
like here is a t-shaped fracture like
here would be another t-shaped fracture
here's another one here's another one a
handful of t-shaped fractures per
supercontinent and the arms of this
t-shaped triple Junction will like kind
of spread the faulting will continue and
they're like drawing up and eventually
as they all join up they'll Shear apart
entire chunks of content now the
interesting thing about that is is we
can imagine that this arm will go along
to create a fracture and this arm will
go along to create a fracture and that
this whole plate section will move away
but what occurs with this arm third arm
this can get really interesting either
it too continues to go so that we can
imagine like say for example in an old
history maybe this arm would continue
and Fracture off this chunk of South
America it can do that totally fine and
we will often do this in the simulation
but it can also just stop and become a
failed Rift a rift that didn't Rift
apart the entire continent this can be
reactivated later
which we'll get into in the next videos
or it could just remain a failed Rift
and this represents like a weak point in
the crust so this allows us to place our
major river basins you'll notice here
the failed Rift here forming the Niger
River modern day Niger River Valley
with Amazon here entering the sea along
a failed Rift same thing for the
Mississippi the over Norco
Etc so the act of rifting apart a
supercontinent also depending on the
time involved can give us modern day
river basins which is just dope so not
only are we tracking mountain building
and location of continents we're also
tracking Rivers
class so that is how you break apart
Supercuts we're going to make triple
Junctions join them up Rift the
continents apart now the way in which
they Rift apart drift away from one
another follows two main tracks
technically it follows three but we
don't even need to get into that I would
even say it should just follow one track
for the sake Simplicity and that is this
extra version let me try and make this
bigger hold on here we go these are our
two tracks extraversion or introversion
this one is the easy option we should
stick to it this one's the harder option
I'd not recommend it unless you really
wanted to get fancy the process is
already involved let's not make it more
involved so here's how this goes we got
a super continent here this is a cross
section of a planet
we have the subduction zones beginning
to form here once formed these
production zones this is a oceanic
continental Collision are going to want
to force this part of the continent this
part of the supercontinent this way
and this part of the supercontinent this
way as such we got a weak point here
mantle plume triple Junction
Etc leading to rifting apart of the
continent forming a fledgling Oceanic
Oceanic Divergent Zone this process will
continue you'll notice that this ocean
has grown it has rifted apart the
sections of the old supercontent have
now been really far displaced from where
they originally were
and our subduction zone is still going
strong and then eventually what happens
is that these pieces of the old
supercontinent reassemble themselves on
the opposite side of the planet like 180
degrees away away from where they
started we got a brand new ocean here
younger ocean crust and we have a bunch
of like erogeny happening here and also
we'll get a bunch of originally along
the way obviously because of the
interaction between these plate
boundaries and the way in which the
plates Bang into one another but the
basic take home is that the outer
section of the old supercontinent when
it goes through extroversion becomes the
intersection of the new supercontinent
and then from there you can Rift it
apart again break it up and take it to
your modern world that's the easy mode
now the hard mode introversion it's time
for the super content we have subduction
zones beginning to form this is going to
make this content want to move this way
this part of the continent move that way
rifting opens same thing as before great
then what happens
is that these subduction zones die
couldn't tell you why that occurs but it
occurs it's a thing which means that we
got some rifting happening here so
there's gonna be motion this way now
meaning we got subduction going on here
these these this new ocean that was
created basically stops growing and then
inverts in upon itself introversion so
we got a sucking motion here which means
that these continents are going to want
to get pulled back from whence they came
and they slam right into one another
forming a new supercontinent where the
old supercontinent was Dole not
necessarily in the exact same
permutation right so in some
extroversion supercontinent spits apart
reassembles itself on the opposite side
of the globe introversion supercontinent
spits apart drifts out for a little bit
and then reverses course and slams back
into itself on the same side of the
patch those are two main strategies
please For the Love of All That is Holy
do not do introversion extroversion is
the way to go and the final thing I'm
going to talk about here thank thanks
for putting up with me folks is as we
simulate these extraversion or
introversion Cycles if you're truly
Bonkers we're going to come across a
number of kind of
um recurring I guess plate patterns and
it's worth kind of covering them now so
that when we meet them in a simulation
uh we're not at Sea four main types here
let's start off with the first one
convergent continent Divergent we have a
convergent boundary here plates are
converging
then there's a continent and then
there's a divergent boundary here
like a mid-ocean ridge this should look
very familiar this is
what's going on in South America Nazca
plate is going this way South America
plate is going that way convergent
continent and then the Divergent
mid-ocean ridge this is the sort of
South American system if you will
convergent continent convergent
boundaries this is a bit weirder because
it doesn't really exist on modern day
Earth this is the kind of typical state
of continents in the later stages of
extroversion where everything is coming
back together a situation that modern
the Earth is not in we have a convergent
boundary here with an active margin
identical to the previous example Andean
or laramide style erogeny smooth
Coastline cool but on the other side we
also have an active margin and we also
have erogeny going on I'm not going to
get into the nuts and bolts of this I
would encourage you to read World
building pastors blog links in
description but effectively what's going
on here the main sort of trust of this
Continental section is going in this
direction but there's also a poll here
at the subduction zone so the continent
kind of goes full stretch arms strong
and begin to be kind of pulled apart
along the trailing Edge this is the
Leading Edge direction of its kind of
predominant motion along the trailing
Edge this results in a Thing Called slab
rollback the effect of which is that
mountain building on this end won't be
as high as on this end kind of like
major mountain building and like minor
mountain building and because of this
like stretching out sort of thing you
can also get oceanic crust formed behind
the orogeny forming a thing called a
back Arc Basin we do have an example of
a back Arc Basin on Earth and that would
be the Sea of Japan
which is here so you kind of like main
continent you have this back Arc Basin
and then you have just to keep our
scenarios same the trailing Edge and
you'll note here that there's no Ridge
in this little section of ocean so this
this thing here could never like expand
and be stretched out to become an entire
ocean of its own it's like this like
trapped
Basin basically again I would encourage
you to read World building past this
block but in general standard South
American style of rajini here stretched
out
lower style erogeny here with a possible
back Arc Basin all right that's
convergent consonant convergent system
number three
convergent Divergent convergence you
have a convergent boundary here plates
coming together
a divergent boundary here like a
mid-ocean ridge played spreading apart
and the convergent boundary here plates
coming together it's depicted as being
Island arcs here but they could be
full-on consonants as well on either
side good examples of this IRL is a
situation that occurs between the
Pacific actually let's go this direction
that would make more sense the Pacific
Place and where is it the Nazca plate
here I can't tell where the boundaries
are yeah that's the bottom of it so it's
something like
like this that's about the Nazca plate
somewhere here we got the very Divergent
zones up in here convergent
and convergent actually can I get that
all in one shot probably not
turns out the Pacific real big now this
is super stable right because
at the mid-ocean ridge spreading is
symmetrical so this is going to spread
symmetrically either side and this is
going to be sucked in and this is going
to feed the subduction zones on either
end and this can kind of just keep going
for a long long time it's a super stable
situation but not always if there's any
kind of like imbalance of the system one
side will subduct more than the other
side and you end up in a situation where
this rage for example will get sucked in
under here and guess consumed and then
the whole system can like shut down the
ocean can close up one cool thing that
can happen though is that instead of
having a single Ridge you can have
multiple ridges meeting at a triple
Junction always a triple Junction plates
only ever meet are t-shapes never
crosses and what can happen here under
certain circumstances that I don't
entirely understand the forces here can
kind of cause this triple Junction to
kind of spread apart and grow this like
triangular shaped place like a new
oceanic place from the the triple
Junction and this is exactly how the
Pacific Plate was born and this thing
will continue to grow out along the
boundaries here these would be
subduction zones because it's subducting
the older ocean and then we'd expect the
associated orogeny volcanic island arcs
Etc and these will like grow along the
boundaries of this new plate and
eventually when there's you know
continents along the other side they
will slam into those continents forming
lots of collisional orogeny and just
gives rise to a super like
higgledy-piggledy Coastline again I'd
read the World building pastors blog for
a little bit more info if you're
interested this is a thing as a World
Builder we can declare to do like if we
have a big open ocean but a triple
Junction we can declare I'm just going
to start growing a plate from that
triple Junction growing it outwards or
not it's up to us all right so that's
the sort of situations that can occur at
a convergent Divergent convergent plate
boundary think the Pacific Ocean next up
finally uh convergent Divergent
continent this is also really cool so we
have a consonant here convergent
boundary so we'd have Andean or laramide
style orogeny smooth Coastline then we
have a mid-ocean ridge and then we have
some sort of other continent now this is
being sucked in from one side so
necessarily this mid-ocean ridge is
going to travel towards the subduction
zone and eventually get dragged in
forming Laramie style erogeny so when
this middle ocean ridge gets sucked in
under the subduction zone you're gonna
end up a situation like this it's
seduction Zone ocean content this
continent has no other choice asterisks
but to slam into this one over time
leading us to a situation where we have
consonant constant collision and we have
Himalayan or Ural style orogeny so
that's all pretty straightforward but
there's a small wrinkle here an
interesting wrinkle imagine we're back
in this scenario but this content here
it couldn't move relative to this let's
say it was attached to something this
subduction zone is going to need to
gobble up something subduction zones are
hungry they gobble up all before them
and what that necessarily means is that
a rift is going to form in this
continent here shearing it apart forming
a microcontinent which will then be free
to move and bang into this again forming
similar rods into this but like still
having an ocean behind it the fun thing
here is that the only thing that can
shut down a subduction zone is a
consonant consonant Collision two
continents come together and
functionally glue together so imagine a
microcontinent spits off here it moves
over here and it slams into this this
will shut down that subduction zone but
the mantle below is still churning in
this counterclockwise manner as it was
when the subduction is almost active
this means that after the Collision of
the supercontinent really quickly in
terms of geological time a new
subduction zone will open up right
beyond our collided microcontinent and
then the process can start again another
bit could be shorn off and that could
Slam in a new micro a new subduction
zone could form because of the motion of
the mantle Etc so you get this really
complicated like um rapid fire again
geologically speaking Collision of like
bits of consonant one after rubber after
another again leading to the situation
where you have if the ocean eventually
closes and something big comes and slams
into it Himalayan style originally right
and those are the four main types again
if you want to learn more information
about that World building pasta
great great blog go check them out links
in description that is what plates are
what the type of boundaries are what
features we'd expect to occur at the
various types boundaries an overview of
the process of simulating plate
tectonics over the course of about a
billion years and a really quick
overview of the sort of patterns one can
see
during that simulation I think that's it
I don't think I forgot anything if I had
I'll mention it in the next video
which next video we're going to bust out
G plates and I'm going to begin to show
you how you can simulate plate tectonics
right that's us massive thanks to vangu
Vanguard resin artist over here in
artifexia go check them out and a
massive thanks to World building pasta
again can thank the guy enough so
awesome go check them out also can't
thank you enough for watching I really
hope you enjoyed thanks for sporting
show thanks for supporting me on patreon
and until next time Ed Gross
foreign