# New Series - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 0

good morning interweb world builders log
zero today we are going to start a brand
new series on artifact scene well
technically the series will start in the
next video this is kind of like an
episode zero just wanna let you guys
know what to expect before we start
construction proper so first up
goals what are the goals of this series
simply put the goal is to create a
fictional world
shock hour perfectly on brand
specifically though i want to look at
three aspects of world building that
interest me in particular geo fiction
spec bio
and conlang
and we're going to look at them in that
order so the idea is that we are going
to build planets stars moons etc then
we're going to take a planet and we're
going to populate it with hopefully very
cool fictional flora and fauna
and then we're going to bring in some
humans create a language for those
humans and by extension a culture as
well
and that's basically the project in a
nutshell oh another thing i want to do i
want to make sure that this new series
is beginner friendly
so it won't be the most out there
trippiest setting in the world i want it
to be kind of easy to understand and
approachable no matter what your skill
level is now the focus of artifexian has
and always will be tutorial style videos
that being said spec bio i've never
attempted a spec buyer project before so
this is entirely new ground for me
be aware of that
con hanging something similar there i'd
like to create a naturalistic conlang
which is a thing i've only really gotten
into in the past two to three years so
i'm very much still a novice in this
sphere again bear that in mind
now the format of the videos
is going to change i'm going to move
from the old style which is quite
reliant on graphics scripts and probably
if i was really honest myself were just
way overproduced i want to strip it all
back in this series make it more
personable and make it more casual so
we're looking at
long form podcast style videos about
maybe 30 to 45 minutes in length
the aesthetic is just going to be that
of the screen share i'm just going to
share my screen and talk through my
creations as i create them and most
importantly of all this is going to be a
warts and all series so any goofs and
gaffs they're going to be left in any
mistakes i make they're also going to be
left in any retcons any dumb things i
say anything at all is going to be left
in the videos the idea is that like any
creative project isn't just like a
linear thing it's really messy things go
right things wrong etc and i want to
document all of that because i think
it's really instructive i'll make
mistakes and i'll learn from them you'll
learn from my mistakes and we'll all
learn together and hopefully go out into
the world and build bigger better
fictional universes and i guess the
final thing is
time frame
this is not a little mini series that's
going to be over really quickly this is
going to be the content on the channel
going forward
for a long time like i suspect to get
all this done
we could easily be looking at three to
five years to do
all of this so you need to be aware of
that before going forward if this is not
something
that interests you now is the time to
unsubscribe because this is what we're
going to be doing for a good while
anyways that's that i am super excited
to get started with this new series i
hope you enjoy i'll see you in episode
one where a serious construction is
going to take place until next time
edgar out
you