# GPlates: The Supercontinent - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 10

good morning interweb world Builders log
10. today I'm going to show you how to
use G plates to create a full tectonic
history of your fantasy world but before
we do that I have two points of
follow-up from the previous video so in
the previous video I had said that when
it comes to Oceanic Oceanic divergent
plate boundaries you can expect volcanic
islands like Iceland that is not
incorrect though I should clarify that
Iceland is kind of a weird anomaly we
wouldn't expect Iceland analogues to
crop up all that often so if we have a
look at this map here there is Iceland
and you'll note that along all of the
other divergent boundaries there isn't
really any other Iceland style analog
It's A peculiar case of a hot spot
encountering a mid-ocean ridge and
there's an Associated large igneous
province which we'll talk about later so
don't go plotting Iceland analogues
everywhere sparingly is best and finally
there's an error in the part of the
video where I talked about a new ocean
played form warming when there's a
triple Junction between three other
ocean plates I had said that along the
boundary of this new ocean plate that
forms there there will be a subduction
zone that is incorrect the boundaries
will be mid-ocean ridges they'll be
Oceanic Oceanic Divergent zones the
seduction zones will be on the perimeter
of the other ocean plates and that's
what will cause this plate to grow the
ridge here will move towards the
subduction zone as this plate is
subducted same thing here same thing
here so the internal part here will just
continue to expand so to be clear no
subduction zone along the boundaries of
the newly created oceanic plate in this
context they're around the outside
alright with that in the back let's
start working on a full tectonic history
to do this you're going to need the app
called G plate go to gplate.org hit
download here in the top bar and
download G plate 2.3 the latest version
as of the release of this video it works
on Mac and windows I currently have it
installed on an Intel based Mac an
arm-based Mac And my partner's Windows
laptop and it works fine in all of those
some people have been reporting that
they can't get it to work and that's I
think because it's a 64-bit app so if
you're running a 32-bit operating system
it may not work but for most people this
this should work click the link to
download it's all very self-explanatory
and then open it up and you'll be met
with something that looks like this
quick overview of the UI before we get
started there's basically like five
components to this there's the toolbar
section over here which can be accessed
with the hotkeys one two three four five
six seven descending each of these menus
have a bunch of sub menus which can be
accessed either manually or through
various top Keys which we'll talk about
generally they tend to be single letters
at the top here we have a timeline zero
million years ago is the present day
world and we can scroll back through our
simulation all the way to beginning
whatever this figure may be and as basic
playback controls here your version of
GPS would likely be 200 here 200 million
years ago you can change that manually
here to whatever you want but if you
want cheap plates to always open with
the same length of simulation you can go
to the G plates menu you can go to
preferences and in the view section here
you can set start to whatever you want
to be I'd recommend maybe a thousand
million years to maybe 850 million years
and keep everything else the same and
that means every time you start off GPS
it'll always have the same number here
here we have a little info box that will
come in handy later and here we have a
sort of like um I guess like feature
section so every time you click and
select something it'll pop up here and
we can change the view panel here to
whatever projection we want by selecting
The View thing here and we get like a
rectangular projection okay later if
you're a
sadista or mold wider I don't know how
it's actually pronounced uh Robinson
projection most of the time though
you're gonna be working in 3D
orthographic to manipulate the sort of
viewport here you can hold Ctrl or
command and then click and drag to move
your Globe around
in any direction in 3D space to zoom in
you can scroll on your mouse or trackpad
or you can come over here to the sidebar
and scroll using the scroll bar super
easy so let's get drawing First Step
draw our initial supercontinent this
will be like the initial condition of
our simulation we don't care how this
super content came into being we just
assume it is and we evolve for to
generate the features of our world this
supercontinent would be comprised of if
you're doing a full-on simulation and
you want it to be relatively Earth-like
about 8 to 12 cratons surrounded by a
bunch of accreted continental crust so
what is a Craton well a Craton is an old
stable part of the crust that doesn't
really
get affected per se by plate tectonics
it's kind of like in the interior of
tectonic plates away from where all the
action mountain building and erogeny is
happening these sections tend to be you
know extremely old and in the modern
world they'll like surface as kind of
very flat regions because they're not
subject to erogeny that occurs at plate
boundaries if you go down to the
examples section of the crate on
Wikipedia page you can see some cool
examples of cratons like the darwar
Craton nor China Craton this is a
particularly good image here the
Amazonia crater and you can see a bunch
of cratons there and this demonstrates
kind of the vibe we're going for you
have these large cratons surrounded by a
bunch of continental crust so let's draw
those in again 8 12 is a good number to
shoot for for a Earth-like world but I'm
doing a little demo system here so I'll
just do three so hit G on your keyboard
to bring up the digitized new polygon
tool alternatively you can click on the
digitize menu here and then go to
digitize new polygon geometry and this
is really simple all you do is Click
various points and G plates will join up
those points creating a polygon so let
me draw a little shape here
something like that you don't need to
close up your shape G plates will do
that automatically and it has a little
ghost line there to show you what it
will do if you're unhappy with what
you're drawing you can command z a
controller command Z through it to
delete points
or you hit V on your keyboard to bring
up the move vertex tool and you can
hover over any of these points and then
drag them around you can hit I on your
keyboard to bring up the insert vertex
tool and with this you hover over a line
segment click and then add a Vertex
there if you're unhappy with any of the
vertexes you've drawn you can hit X on
your keyboard the delete vertex tool
hover over vertex you don't like and
then click to delete it now these
cratons they vary wildly in size but
about one thousand to four thousand
kilometers is a good sort of size so
let's check what this guy is doing so
hit s on your keyboard to bring up the
measure tool over on the top right hand
corner we can input the radius of our
planet let's just assume earth radius
for the sake of this demonstration and
here it'll give you the total length of
the object that is selected and the area
of that object or you can click on
various points on the globe and it'll
give you the length of the line segment
that is created between those points so
if we go from like here to Here For
example hover over that line we can see
that at the crate on width-wise is about
1 500 kilometers and then height Wise
It's about 2 000 kilometers so that's
about right for a crater once you're
finished measuring and you want to get
rid of those that ghost line you hit
command or control K to kill the line
hit G on the keyboard again and you'll
notice that it's gone back into like
edit mode and down at the bottom here we
have a create feature button we're happy
with this crate on so let's create this
feature from the list here choose Craton
a large portion of a continental plate
that has been relatively undisturbed
since the pre-camping era and includes
both shield and platform layers that's
cool hit next
don't touch this box here in general you
don't tend to touch this box at all
really in the common properties here
give your Crayton a plate ID I'd
recommend something like a hundred do
not whatever you do don't give it a
plate ID of zero that's really important
zero is reserved by the program to do
other things the play that is important
because it's like a tag and any object
that's tagged with the same play Hoodie
will move in tandem as we begin to move
stuff around so like it's really
important to like diligently assign
player IDs and keep on top of them as
you proceed and it's not relevant now
but it'll be relevant later on once we
have created this feature at no point
should we change its plate ID thereafter
it will cause just Untold problems you
assign Affinity at the creation of a
feature and that is it that is its plate
ID done now for the beginning and end
time we're going to assume that this was
around since a distant past and it
because it's away from the disturbances
of plate tectonics for the most part is
going to continue into the distant
future it will continue into our modern
world and we should give it a name let's
call it Craton a hit next
all of this doesn't matter for our
purposes just quite yet so let's hit
next again and now we want to create a
new feature connection it's basically
just like create a new folder like stuff
should go in like folders so create a
new feature and let's create create and
Save
out will pop all of these pop-ups now we
have the manage feature collection
section and a layer section I'd
recommend pinning the layer section so
let me go over here
and place this
here print and for the manage feature
collections you'll see that there is a
it's highlighted that means it's unsafe
so let's save as we will select a folder
and we recall this feature correction
cratons we can close this now and we'll
see that in the layers panel cratons is
selected and what we can do here if we
so desire we can twiddle down little
drop down menu here and we could say
fill polygons which will fill up the
color and we could reduce the opacity of
those polygons let's say
0.5 Maybe
something like that not important just
visually that might be of interest to
you
okay and that is how you create a Craton
I'm going to add in two more so hit G on
your keyboard to bring up the digitized
new polygon tool and let's make a Craton
down
here maybe
something like that perhaps s on the
keyboard let's see roughly what it's
with
one five
one cool that's fine that's ground
command Kate kill that selection G on
the keyboard to go back into edit mode
then hit create feature it is indeed a
crayon fair play
ID we're going to give it a different
plate IDs let's just increment the first
digit so let's go to 200. it was created
in a distant past
or it began in the distant past and it
will continue to the distant future and
we're given a new name crate on B and
then go next none of this matters hit
next again it is a Crayton so it goes in
the Craton feature collection so we'll
just go create boom and let's do that
again let's do hit G on the keyboard to
digitize new polygon tool and let's make
let's make a bigger one up in here say
something like
something like that s for measurements
2000 by
about two thousand cool that's Grand
command Kate kill that g to go back into
edit mode create feature you know the
deal crate on
increment
the plate ID give it a different page ID
we'll call it 300 and give it a new name
keep distant past and distant future
selected hit next doesn't matter any of
this hit next it's great on so it goes
into the Craton feature collection just
hit create now those are the cratons
created you will notice though that one
I didn't go into great detail with them
in general the stuff in G plates is
pretty low poly work I guess you could
go in and add like hundreds of points to
make it like super organic looking but
that's going to kill the simulation
later on so work in low poly and that
really all I'm thinking is like you know
something that's oval shaped something
that's like a lot wider than it is high
something's more bulbous just vague
things like that we're not looking for
Mad detail at this stage and the other
thing is the colors here are also
assigned based on play Hoodie so a
player ID of a hundred I think that was
100 hit F on your keyboard for choose
feature click on the feature yes down
here at the bottom we see plated D100 so
anything that's marked with plate ID 100
will be a light blue anything that's
marked with 200 will be a light green or
a dark green rather ending a sparked
with 300 will be a pink there are finite
amounts of colors in gPad so you get
duplicates after a while but in general
one color per plate ID alright those are
cratons now just like in this picture
here we want to surround those with
continental crust you'll notice that
sometimes Continental cross gets really
close to the Kratom but like a huge
squads of land can occur outside of the
cratons and that's kind of encouraged so
let's do something like that hit G on
the keyboard to digitize new polygon too
I'm gonna hit Ctrl or command and just
drag this up a little bit so I can see
this better G again and now I'm just
going to like encase these cratons with
some continental crust
something like that again low poly is
fine we're not creating pretty world
maps here we're simulating to figure out
where our land forms should be now so
this is our initial supercontinent a
bunch of land with craytons in the
middle it's worth noting that if you
want your planet to be relatively
Earth-like you'd want to have the
supercontinent account for about 25 of
the surface area of the entire planet
you can go plus or minus by a fair
degree if you so desire but I would say
at above
50 the surface area of the planet you're
in dodgy territory and apparently
there's some evidence out there suggests
that plate Titanics may never like get
triggered if so much of the planet is
covered in continental crust
so 25 is about your golden Zone but you
can deviate a little bit so again we can
use the measure tool to figure this out
like now obviously my super content is
gonna be nowhere near 25 but let's just
go through it for the sake of
demonstration s on the keyboard to bring
up your measure tool the Continental
cross section is highlighted so it has
an area of what the hell is that that's
like 23
million kilometers yeah we'll just round
the 23 million kilometers so to work out
the percentage let's put that in 23
million
and multiply that by the surface area of
the planet which is given by four times
pi times the radius what's the radius
they're using here six three seven eight
it's an odd phrase I never really see
that figure for the radius of Earth
but here we are
and we square that so you know basic
maths the surface area of your consonant
divided by the surface area of the
planet and in this case I'm getting a
coverage of 0.04 so only four percent of
the surface of this planet is covered by
superconds it's extremely low your
consonants will be more just remember
don't go above 50 or not 0.5 all right G
began to go back into edit mode we go to
create feature this is not a crate on
this is continental crust
so there's a common cross thing here
description continental crust very
illuminative excellent hit next now the
playhead ID is interesting we don't want
this consonant to move independently
when we come to move it of these cratons
so what you should do is assign the
Continental cross section here a plate
ID of Warner cratons let's just say a
hundred so wherever 100 goes it will go
to this was created distant past will
continue to distant future for now that
will change later this is not Craton see
we're going to call this
continent and then ABC so we'll name it
after the cratons it contains okay don't
touch up here hit next none of this
matters hit next this is not a crate on
so we're going to go to create new
feature collection create and save new
feature connection so we'll save that
new feature connection as
continents and we'll hit save
and while we're here we made it to go to
create hunts and hit save again done and
again you'll know if we gave our
continental crust a plate ID of 100 same
as this Craton so they're the same color
now if you don't want that like if you'd
like to fill in your content which I
would imagine most people would want to
do you could go down to fill polygons
for example and then you could drop the
opacity to something really small
something like that or you can go to set
draw style for example and I'll go to
single color and you can just select a
color
that you like it doesn't make any
difference whatsoever it just whatever
is more visually appealing to you and
makes it easier to see for you so I'm
just gonna go white and boost this up
just a little bit cool right now at this
point we should probably save our
project always a good thing to do so
let's go oh sorry get used to going
command or control M before you save
everything should be white here if
anything is highlighted that means
something is unsaved you need to
individually save those like folders
those those features before you could
save the Project's hold so in this case
everything is saved so I'm fine then I
go to file save project as and allow me
to save and we'll call it Demo World and
we'll save it in the same folder we're
saving all of our feature Corrections
always be organized save okay so super
content done that's great no but the
super content is not long for this world
we're obviously going to want to break
it apart so let's set up that process
and in the next video we'll begin the
actual breaking apart the moving of
stuff as many in the previous video are
super consumable form like an insulating
layer over mantle mantle plumes will
come up they'll burst through the crust
forming triple Junctions the triple
Junctions will join up to form a rift
that will eventually Shear the continent
in Twain so here's where we got to make
some decisions how are we going to do
this like we could say that a bunch of
triple Junctions happen along here oh
and FYI don't touch your cratons they're
not involved in this this is only in the
weaker continental crust so we're gonna
have a bunch of triple Junctions that
come up here that join together so that
this kind of half of the continent
shears away maybe it goes this direction
and this this other half goes that
direction
or alternatively we could have a bunch
of triple Junctions form this way so the
the fracture is here so maybe this one
goes up this way and these two go down
this way or we could do something more
complicated in one foul swoop there's a
shearing that happens here and at the
same time almost there's a shearing that
happens there so they each go their own
separate way each of the crate hunts
loads of different options and it's
entirely up towards to the side which we
want
any are valid all depends on what you
want to do so I'm going to say for
argument's sake that will just yeah
we'll share the consonant down here
down through the middle sending this
crate on and the associated continental
crust this way and did these two cradons
and their Associated common crossed that
way I think that's what we're going to
do so I'm gonna hit L on my keyboard or
I'm going to go to the digitize menu and
then up to digitize new polyline
geometry and just what it says this is
the creator line tool L for line so I'm
going to zoom in and I'm going to trace
out where I think that Rift happens now
remember this Rift is a connection of
various triple Junctions so it's kind of
going to necessarily be very zigzaggy so
I would encourage you to reflect that so
don't do something like like this this
is a bit that would be a bit odd do
something a little bit more fractured so
I'm gonna do
something
like
uh this perhaps there we go if you want
to get really picky make sure everything
like really lines up although it's not
really that useful uh you can hit V to
move something move a Vertex you can
move the vertex right up to here and
zoom back out again
and go down to here
and hit V and move that vertex
right on us but again it's all depending
on how kind of I guess uh accurate you
want to be it doesn't really matter L to
bring back the like editing sort of
thing so we can get our feature
connection button so let's hit the
feature create new feature this is not
continental crust this is a continental
Rift a spreading Rift on continental
crust cool hit next
plate ID now give it a player ID of one
right and set aside that plate ID for
stuff that you don't want to move you'll
see why this is important in a second
but this Rift won very important now
this wasn't formed in the distant past
this forms at the start of our
simulation and if you haven't already
done so make sure the scroll bar is all
the way at the start so the time is the
start of the simulation so I want this
one to begin at the start of the
simulation so it is not creating distant
past it was created a thousand million
years ago
it is not called content ABC it is
called it is a rift
and let's give it its date sort of rift
at a thousand million years ago okay and
then we go next doesn't matter what any
of this we go next again not a crate on
not a continent so we create a new
feature connection create and save and
we'll save this fella as
riffs
okay and then we can close this and
let's go down to our riffs menu and I'm
going to say set draw style single color
and let's give it a pretty standout
color like
an orange or red or something if you
don't have red I don't think red is
there when you first start GPS you can
just choose a color hit choose color
wheel pops up pick something you like
and it'll be saved in this menu so I'm
just going to go red and there we have
it there is our Rift and again like this
Rift because this this portion will be
sent this way this portion is gonna be
sent this way it'll form like the shape
of a coastline by and large
um so you know you can be a bit nicer
than I am being about it here I'll show
you at the end of the video I'll show an
example of what the initial supercars
should look like if you're doing like a
full-on world now also in the previous
video we mentioned that at any of these
triple Junctions two of the arms will
spread out to form a rift but there'll
be a third arm of the sort of the triple
Junction and app which can either go on
to become a new Rift of its own or it
could be a failed Rift that we can
either choose to reactivate later or
have become a river valley in our modern
world so so let's do that let's put in
like I know I want to split this
continent in half again later so let me
put in a rift here that we can
reactivate later so again I'm going to
hit L my keyboard to bring up the
polyline tool I'll zoom in
let's say this is a triple drone kit
here so let's make our third arm click
here and let's do something remember
zigzag he's your friend something like
something like that
okay create feature Continental Rift
take ID now this is not a plate idea of
one because again just thinking ahead
slightly this chap is going to move this
way and this chap is going to move this
this whole other section is going to
move that way this Rift needs to come
with the land because it's a failed Rift
so we're gonna need to give it a plate
ID if something on this side of the
continent so I either have paid a day of
200 or played ID of 300 here so I'm
going to say just for argument's sake
let's say it's a paid ID of let's make
it the big one the big one is 300. uh it
began at a thousand million years ago
correct it it began when this opened as
well it is not a rift 1000 it is in fact
a failed Rift 1000.
or failed rift at a thousand million
years ago hit next it doesn't matter
what any of this hit next and yeah we'll
make a new feature correction for it so
we'll go create and save and we will
save this feature collection up as
failed riffs and we'll go save
boom let's go down to our fail riffs and
let's set a draw Style
and we'll make it like a subdued color
like silver and again you could go on
adding failed riffs at each
place that you think of triple Junction
will be at so for example I could go up
here
I hit L on my keyboard and I make a
little Rift here
say our triple Junction is
something
like this
something like that create a feature
it's a continental Rift fair play it
will need to move with this crate on so
we need to give it a plate ID of a
hundred it was created at a thousand
million years ago correct it goes on to
the distant future and we will edit that
later so just distant future for now and
its name is failed Rift 1000 cool next
doesn't matter next and save it in the
failed riffs collection and we go create
and that is basically how your
supercontinent should look although
again yours will be more elaborate
because it should have more crayons
remember 8 12 more failed riffs Etc but
that's the basic process I'm going to
stop it here because the next step is
like literally breaking it apart and
moving it and we'll cover that in the
next video and as promised here's what
it should roughly look like if you're
doing full scale version ignore the blue
subduction zones here we're going to do
them later but what we see here is we
have a big content here we have one two
three four five six seven eight nine ten
cratons we have a rift occurring here we
also have a rift occurring here so I
suspect this continent is going to go
this way this one's gonna go this way
this one is going to go this way and we
have a bunch of failed riffs coming off
the various triple Junctions that either
can be activated later or just left as
failed Rifts into the modern world and
again important to note the low poly
nature of this there's no like mad
integral signs you're just looking for
kind of General sort of shapes fewer
points is kind of better here but in
reason all right G plate part one done
massive thanks to World building pasta
for allowing me to take his blog post
and make it into video Form shout out as
well this is World building pasta's work
that he's working on for this setting so
shout out again World building pasta
shout out Wenger Van Gogh resident
artist links in description to all of
these flying folks please please check
them out and final massive shout out to
all of you guys for watching the videos
really really appreciate I love each and
every one of you until next time
Edgar house
foreign