# GPlates: Island Arc Collisions - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 15

good morning interweb world Builders log
15. today we're going to start colliding
stuff together but first some follow-up
now this series or rather G plates
portion of this Series has been met with
uh mixed reviews a lot of people like it
that's people really really dislike it
which I get this is certainly not for
everyone I don't want to alienate a
bunch people so I'm going to change tact
slightly we are not going to be doing a
full simulation now that is I'm not
going to be taking all these continents
reassembling them on the other side of
the globe to create another
supercontinent and then breaking that
apart I'm only going to press the
simulation so far as to demonstrate all
the techniques one might need in order
to do a full simulation that way the
value of this series as a tutorial is
not diminished but we also get out of G
plates at the earliest possible time
which I think is a good compromise let
me know what you think in comments now
offer to to save a bit of time I moved
the simulation forward another 50
million years nothing has happened other
than things have moved further apart
now you'll notice in theory these
continents could just keep going and
reassemble themselves on the other side
of the globe which is fine but a little
bit unrealistic along the way we'd
expect them to bump into one another
which would give rise to orogeny
mountain building and cool geography so
to help with this we're going to need to
add subduction zones in between our
continents General tips regarding
exploring zones much like before we
should prefer to add them along
coastlines because ocean crossed likes
subduct under buoyant continental crust
and in general the ocean crust
surrounding a continent will necessarily
be much older and therefore much denser
than the newly created crossed at
mid-autian ridges so it will really want
to sink and in general if your ocean
crust gets to about like three 400
million years old it's so old and so
dense that you should open up new
subduction zones then these consequence
of this is that every couple of time
steps you will be adding subduction
zones in between your continents which
will help draw them together a little
bit and create cool Collision along the
way to reforming a supercontinent so
with that in mind this Northern
continent has been rotating around a
little bit which I think is putting
pressure on this ocean so I think I'm
going to add a subduction zone along
this Coastline to draw pink to blue here
same as before add on the keyboard to
bring up the digitized new polyline tool
and simply draw a line
subduction zone
plate ID of the continent in this case
300 beginning at 750. going to distant
future sub 750.
now that is incredibly hard to see so at
this stage we should go down to our
subduction zones panel here on the
layers panel we don't see it controller
command L twiddle down the drop down
arrow set draw style single color and
blue I believe blue is the canonical
color for subduction zones there much
better oh whoops that doesn't go down to
mid-ocean rage hold on
add select feature I to insert a point
and I'm going to just bring it down to
the mid-ocean ridge done now so just
like in previous videos we need to cut
out everything to the left of this
subduction zone separating it from
everything to the right I'm going to
give everything to the left a plate ID
of 301 because this would be a fairly
short-lived place the subduction zone
here will also get a priority of 301 as
will the island arc and it will follow
the same procedure as the previous video
so no new information time-lapse mode
engaged
foreign
foreign
plate id301 is again the exact same
process as the previous video
foreign
play 301 ocean one doesn't really matter
this plate is not long for this world
foreign
before we start moving things notice
that our flow lines here they connect
blue and pink together so this continent
with this continent but now we've
created this separate plate in between
these two features so I'm going to
reconstruct these flow lines connecting
blue and gray here and the same thing
down here I'm going to reconstruct a
portion actually no the whole shebang of
these flow lines connect green and gray
and then green and pink and then pink
and pink we could do this after we move
the continents but I'll just get all the
housekeeping out of the way before we
move stuff once again no new information
so to be clear I'm taking this portion
of the rift and saying it connects blue
and 301 which is the gray continent
which is going to come in between these
two
gonna split this Rift again so we can
connect gray and green pink and green
and then pink and what in the future
will also be pink
foreign
ERS here as well
all right Dawn I messed up there
slightly towards the end but all is well
all right let's get moving stuff so I'm
gonna move these three continents in
time lapse mode and then I'm going to do
real time for the new stuff here
foreign
again the key thing with moving
consonants watch your speed using the
command shift K tool the kinematics tool
and also watch your flow lines adjacent
flow lines should not overlap so I'm
going to save up here just in case we
mess up a meter reboot so let's deal
with our new plate first this place is
an oceanic place and it is an oceanic
plate that is being subducted air goal
per our speed charts from previously it
should be moving at about 8 to 20
centimeters per year 20 is very high I'd
stay away from that closer to eight is
probably where where is best so let's do
that
and I'm thinking it's just going to like
I think this continent's gonna Hedge
this sort of Direction so I'd imagine
this is this could just head straight
into the broken Zone I think
maybe something like that
yeah so let's go extreme and let's see
how fast that is
command shift k
we're looking at plate 301 between 750
and 700 correct velocity magnitude
correct update it's moving at 11. that's
fine we could slow it down a little bit
let's say what happens if we do that
well 8.9 let's put it right at the
bottom end I think
it's cause
yeah something like that so even before
we've moved the continent most of this
place has been subducted it no longer
exists except for this little part here
now before we move this fellow we should
deal with this Collision there's an
island arc here that is colliding with
this continent
so collisions are in general quite messy
processes so I'd recommend going back to
the start of this time step
and progressing forward in 10 million
year intervals so 750 to 740 and when
the island arc is kind of like half
crossed the boundary stop there and take
a note of this island arc's age so how
old is this thing we'll select it island
arc was formed at 8 50.
and we're currently at 7 40. so it's 110
million years old recalled previously we
said that an island arc at about 50
million years old would look a bit like
the Aleutian Islands or the Solomon
Islands at around 100 million years it's
about the Philippine islands and in the
several hundreds of millions of years it
looks like Sumatra so this is about a
philippines-esque formation so keeping
that in mind
I am going to hit G on the keyboard and
I'm going to draw in along this contact
boundary so from here
to like here an appropriate amount of
continental crust that has been accreted
due to this island arc Collision
maybe something like that let me block s
it's 100 odd and what's that that's
about a thousand would probably go more
than that I would advise going more more
is more in this case
foreign
something like that so G and the
keyboard to bring it back into polygon
mode hit create feature this is
continental crust
plate ID it is now attached to uh this
continent with this crate on so that is
300
beginning time
is 740
and this we're going to call this a
accreted
Terrain
at 7 40. next next and for the first
time in a long time we're going to
create a new folder so new feature
collection create and save and I'm going
to save this feature collection as
accreted
Terrain
cool now we want this to have the same
color as the mainland so I'm going to
select our creator terrain find it in
the side panel here scroll down oh no
sorry that's that's incorrect find the
land area
scroll down and under reconstruct the
polygons I'm going to go add new
connection and go or create a train and
then once this appears we can set the
island arc to disappear because it's
been accreted so we're going to go to
edit feature controller command e and
under the valid time tab I'm going to
say it doesn't continue into distant
future it will finish at 7 40 and go
okay and we can also do the same for the
subduction zone
perfect and this may seem like a really
trivial thing but it's really important
because that's the way new crust is
created through Island arcs and then
them eventually colliding with
continents and the reason why I say more
is more here is that these boundaries
here aren't coastlines per se they're
just the extent of the continental crust
so let's say you're creating a world and
you're shooting for 30 land area well if
even after having accreted tons of
Island arcs you're only at 29 then
you've kind of missed your goal a little
bit whereas if you do it if you overdo
with the creation say your modern world
ends up having 35 land area at the end
of the simulation you can always just
pull your call slime back and use as an
excuse to have extra continental shelf
alright with that done let's move this
boil now make sure you're at the correct
time step I am not I must be at the
correct time step which is 700 here and
let's move this fella so again I see him
going
how do I see him going
hmm oh we want him to collide so we kind
of have to force the movement a little
bit
so what happens if I move you
this way I'm going to move him forward a
little bit because we still have
subduction going on around here
again checking with floor lines as I go
and my speed
okay and then
let's come in with the sort of lateral
movement
see what that does for us
yeah something like that
so two things here whenever a new
subduction zone opens we expect a change
in motion of nearby plates so it's
totally fine for this continent to be
going more or less northwards and then
it just takes a hard dive totally cool
and also notice here at start of the
time step we have a subduction zone here
a mid-ocean ridge here but no subduction
zone in the ocean here we have
subduction mid-ocean ridge continent now
had we a subduction zone here we will
form what's known as a stable conveyor
we get more or less even spreading at
the mid-ocean ridge here and more or
less even subduction going on at the
subduction zones the net effect is that
that whole system stays stable and
importantly the mid-ocean ridge remains
in between the two subduction zones but
again we don't have that what we have is
a single subduction zone and you'll see
through the flow lines here that that
has the effect of dragging this
mid-ocean ridge ever closer to this
continent
which hopefully in the next time step
will mean it will be entirely subducted
which is fun and can lead to bluramide
style erogeny that is Rage is going to
miss our continent somewhat at the risk
of having a really long video I want to
keep going a little bit so I'm going to
put in an island arc here maybe extend
the subduction zone down put in some
ocean crust do drift correction fix the
impending flowline Fallout as a result
of it all that tidy up sort of stuff
this is probably going to be too long
even for time lapse so I'm just going to
do it off camera again like nothing new
all of the basics have been covered
already this process so far it's all
true to Magic of YouTube editing it
should look something like
this
little quick Gander at the animation
lovely very messy but we'll we'll sort
it out let's jump forward a Time step to
650 and we'll move some more continents
foreign
speed up the collision between these two
I'm going to add a subduction zone along
here to get this chap moving northward
maybe something like that
'll do that'd be good enough for
demonstration purposes
so we need to be really mindful of these
floor lines here things could get real
messy
I think this will imply this needs to
rotate so I'm going to plot this feather
here in fact now
I'm gonna move them first let's move
them out a little bit
wow the floor lines are remarkably well
behaved this one is getting into
dangerous territory so let's rotate them
a little bit
cool our subducting plate still moving
at about eight centimeters per year even
though yes Moses are subducted this bit
hasn't and it'll still keep that speed
and boom our mid-ocean ridge now has
completely subducted so given that
that's the case I'm now going to set
this entire plate to disappear and the
way you do this in classic tedious G
plates fashion you select each of the
segments go to edit feature select the
other time and say when you want it to
disappear so 650 and you do that for all
the fun
cool okay and now this chap
looking at my flow lines
everything seems gravy
it's happening
oh just shy
all right well it looks like we'll have
Collision time in the next video for now
though let's have a look at this island
arc you were created at 950 million
years ago so it's been around for 300
million years so this is like Sumatra
style island arc in fact I reckon it's
probably gonna be so big let me just
measure that
it's like 500 yeah it's going to be so
big that it's just have connected with
the main line completely I'm thinking
something that's maybe
between like three and maybe 600.
kilometers wide so let's do something
like that
great feature continental crust
say that you have 100 stock to Blue here
I create a Terrain at
we'll call it 650. against life at 650
and we'll add it to accreted trains and
go create could have waited until
they're in contact but you know may as
well do it now all right I think I'm
gonna stop it there for today
yeah
we'll do the proper consonant content
Collision next time alright as always
massive shout out to World building
pasta links in description this whole
series is based upon their methodology
and Shout out as well to vangu vangog
resident artist Oh and before I forget
there's no flow lines here because I
deleted all the old ones to save time
you'll see the ones the relevant ones
pop in in a second
final shout out to all of you thank you
so much for watching you all are the
best of nerds until next time
it grows