# GPlates: Orogeny - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 17

good morning interweb War Builders log
17. today we are going to look at some
erogeny but first I want to do a little
bit more Evolution so we finished up the
last video by adding in this subduction
zone here with a view to subducting this
ocean plate to try and resolve these
like hanging Suboxone zones to save time
off camera I cut out all of the pieces
on this plate here and gave them a plate
ID of 101
and I cut out all the pieces on this
section of oceanic plate and gave them a
plate ID of 302 same deal with the
island arcs and the subduction zones
just like we did the last time we
created a new place what's different
this time is that we have core moving
plates so we want these two to move as
one so there's a little tweak we need to
make in our rotation files so here's
rotation file and here is the code I put
in for our new plates again nothing new
follows the previous videos
and same thing here for plate 302 at the
end
and I've called them ocean three
and ocean 2 just because so if we don't
change anything from last time we'll
have a case for ocean 2 which is this
green section of ocean it will follow a
up until 6 30 then it'll start moving
independently all the way to the end of
the simulation
same deal with plate 302 which is this
lime green stuff here ocean 3 follows C
until 6 30 word starts moving
independently but we do not want both of
these to move independently we have to
wire one to the other so just for sake
I'm gonna wire everything that's 101
to 302 so I'm going to wire the dark
green to the light green so I'm going to
go up to Plate 101 and instead of start
moving independently I'm going to change
the conjugate plate ID here to 302 and
this would be start
following
ocean three and then the same thing
would have to go up here 302 ocean 2 at
the end of simulation so again ocean 2
all the dark green it follows a which is
this blue Craton up until 6 30. at which
point it becomes its own plate but it
follows three or two the lime green
instead of going independently okay so
if I get rid of the line breaks and save
that assuming I've done everything
correctly these two plates should now
move as one so if I select the lime
green here p on the keyboard
highlight children everything there is
highlighted they all move as one so
again unlike last time where we created
a single new plate this time we're
creating a new plate that is cold moving
okay so with that done all I'm going to
do now is just evolve this forward a
little bit resolve the island arcs add
in terrain subduct the oceans set the
subductor pieces to end
Etc all of this has been covered so this
is gonna be one giant time lapse as a
sort of like quick recap of everything
we've covered so far no new information
time lapse and then we'll do some
mountain building
foreign
foreign
foreign
Okay cool so uh one thing to point out
there I forgot to add floor lines like a
fool so I had to import them there
Midway through that the second thing to
point out is check it out the new
supercontinent uh is reforming this chap
is coming this way this chap is coming
this way this chap is coming this way
we'll get a new supercontinent somewhere
here all going well and then the last
thing to point out is that uh some
people in common question the validity
of adding a subduction zone here when
there's already one up here seems like
that would be contradictory motion
consonant is heading this way old ocean
is heading that way whereas here you'd
think content is heading this way to the
South and Old Ocean is heading to North
that seems contradictory the key thing
here is speed differential this
continent is heading north we'll call it
at about three centimeters per year per
million years
and this awesome plate is heading north
as well except at the speed I put it at
about 11 centimeters per year which is a
Touch fast but I wanted to get most of
this island dark song So this subduction
zone works because essentially this new
oceanic plate is like rear ending this
continent it's like ramming into the
back of it and being subducted so things
moving in the same direction can still
be subducted due to speed differential
alright time-lapse mode re-engaged
thank you
foreign
foreign
foreign
foreign
foreign
foreign
foreign
foreign
simulation done we'll stop the movement
here and we'll just call it modern world
for the sake of the tutorial everything
Beyond this point is again iteration of
what we've already covered but there's
one last thing I want to cover before we
start talking about mountains and that
is this continent here so these two
continents came together smashed into
one another and we're going to have a
bunch of mountains here now it's worth
noting that this suture here that is the
junction between the pink and the blue
is a weak spot in the continental crust
and may Rift apart in the future if you
so desire now you'd think if you're
going to do that all you do was run a
rift through this section here if such
rifting virtual curve we'd expect an
exchange of area pink will gain some of
Blues area and blue will gain some of
Pinks area so just to demonstrate I'll
go ahead and jot and Rift L on the
keyboard and essentially this is back to
exactly what we covered in video one of
the stupid series so everything comes
full circle so if I were to rift this
apart I would do something like
something like that oh make sure to go
all the way to the edge of the plate
yeah something like that again pink has
gained some area blue has gained some
area there's been an exchange of crust
all right create feature Continental
Rift next plate ID remember all the way
back to video one state ID of one for
riffs begins out we'll call it 600
that's the future
Rift 600. next next and we'll put that
in riffs angle create it'll disappear
because I got riffs hidden and we'll
turn it on there we go and just if you
are going to do this hold the continents
together for a while
don't bind them together and then
immediately pull them apart bind them
together stick them together for a while
let them move together for a bit and
then Rift them apart if you so desire
all right and with that I think
it is time to go back to the start of
the simulation
and talk mountain building
okay so quick recap on erogeny orogenes
are major mountain building events that
occur along convergent boundaries they
come in for flavors two subduction zone
orogenies and Ian style erogeny and
laramide style rajini and then two
collisional erogenies Euro style erogeny
and Himalayan style rajini and Dina
rajni looks like shakarity Andes
comparatively thin mountain ranges on
coasts with offshores Brooks and zones
Laramie rajanis looks like the Rockies
in the US like Andy and broader they
occur where subduction is particularly
rapid and or when a mid-ocean rage gets
abducted under URL ciderogeny looks like
the URLs comparatively thin mountain
range is a form as a result of simple
collisions between land masses and or if
one or more of the land masses involved
are small and finally Himalayan
salarajni looks like the Himalayas broad
High plateaus that form as a result of
really complex Continental collisions
really energetic content inclusions or
just in general if two big continents
come together right those are the four
types let's start marking them in so
we'll start with the ND and erogeny
along these coasts here that have the
subduction zone offshore hit s on the
keyboard and then measure out about 100
kilometers you don't need to be too
precise here that's about 70 that's fine
that'll do and then go g on the keyboard
and draw in
a thin line
that represents the mountains
and the thickness of this is about a
hundred as well but again you don't need
to be too particular with this okay
something like that great feature we're
looking for orogenic belt next plate ID
is 100 in this instance forms at a
thousand million years ago goes into the
distant future and we'll call this
Andean 1000.
next next and then we want to create a
new feature connection create and save
and save that feature collection as
active
orogenes
save close then go down to the layers
panel here or over to layers panel
controller command L if you don't see it
twiddle down the drop down menu for
active rogenies go to fill polygons set
draw style single color and make them
black
so they stand out oh and also let's drop
the fill here just for a second down to
maybe 0.5 okay same deal for the rest of
them
today you have 300 this time because
it's hatch the pink Parade on
all right done so let's now go for the
time step 950 and add our various
erogenies as we need them now for Island
arcs you could in theory adderogenies on
them but we'll just work on the
assumption that there is continuous
falconism occurring on island arcs
there's no need to add them in when they
collide with something or if they
survive to the modern world then we can
do something but for now we'll just
leave them these bits however have fused
with the continent so I might redo this
to Encompass these so I'm going to hit F
on the keyboard and select that I'm
going to copy geometry to digitize tool
and then I'm just going to draw
something to Encompass these
sure Jeep
create feature or joining belt 201 and
style rajini Ash
950 next next actor rogeny's create done
and then I'm going to select the old
feature
and set it to disappear at this time
cool for another time step we have a new
subduction zone opened here so we want
to add in again Andy Insider arginine
plate that you have 200 this time
because attached to the green Craton
just occurred to me did I put the age
wrong in this one
I did this begins at 9 50. cool onwards
okay new subduction zone again and the
inside originally all along here
okay so here we have an island arc that
has smashed into our continent and that
occurred at 7 40. Okay cool so we'll go
back to 740.
so we have a collision going on here so
that means we're dealing with either URL
or Himalayan Style erogeny no way in
hell that this is Himalayan this is a
very very small section Continental
cross that as being accreted onto this
so Euro erogeny and what we basically
want to do here whenever you have this
sort of Island collision and accreted
terrain you want to cover most of the
created terrain with most of the time a
urologenes so very simple G on the
keyboard and then just make a shape
oh
and you can overlap things here if you
want or you can be super neat it's up to
you so create feature aerogenic belt
correct player D300 good start time is
740 and this would be Euro
7 40. next next I'll put that into
active erogenies
okay and even though this is going to be
involved in the Collision just for the
sake of um completion I guess we will
add in the orogeny here as well again
this is Andean because we have an
offshore subduction zone and this is not
collisional because it's more like this
offshore island arc just grew to fuse
with the content as opposed to colliding
with it
foreign
about this shape because again
everything's going to change here
when these collide
and now we have this to deal with
oh dear I put in player D of 6 30 there
that could not be more wrong something
needs to change there
hold on a second did I really just put
it in a bit ID of 6 30. yep like a fool
copy geometry to digitize tool create
feature origin felt 30 of 300 and then
that's fine and then we'll kill the
silly copy be gone okay now our big
collisional arogeny so whenever you have
something like this originally should
form along the borders of this like
Collision Zone after we deformed the
continent
so in my case it might look something
like
this perhaps
so I'm gonna say that this section has
been completely engulfed in it so I'll
bring it down to yeah let's bring down
to here
I'm just tracing along this deformation
line a little bit or deformation area a
little bit in fact I may as well just
you can just become part of the mountain
the exact shape of these things are like
artistic interpretation I'm sure there's
some geology things that we could be
doing to make them more accurate but
like quite frankly go with the shape
that you find appealing okay something
like that for now but we can change it
later G on the keyboard much the same as
before create feature origenic belt
plate ID will give it a parody of 300
because this is the main Craton on this
newly formed consonant and we'll call
this Himalayan just for the sake of
variety but really like these are very
small land masses in the grand scheme of
things the landmasses didn't come
together very quickly or anything so
really it should be your url but just
just for the sake but
now we need to do some cleanup first
things first this erogeny here we know
that it became this lump of like
accreted deformed terrain here in the
pink we could draw it in there if we so
desire but I'm just going to set it to
disappear this time
okay so it's gone and we'll say like
this lump here we know that it became
the blue section here so if we scroll
back into simulation
there it is there's the blue section and
then the blue section got smushed into
here so this is part of the blue section
so again we could draw it if we wanted
to but I'm just going to set it
disappear
add this at this time step
and then we should tidy up these as well
this is the same method as tidying up
ocean crust select the feature clone the
feature create a write copy and a left
copy set the end time for a bit you want
to disappear you know the deal so let's
do this in time lapse
but it's worth noting it doesn't
disappear it just becomes deformed and
buckled and part of this major mountain
chain
foreign
we have to put in one with this island
arc and this island arc and I think then
we are done yeah we got two lumps of
things happening here okay so
foreign
all
of the erogenes now the only thing
that's left to cover is this major
erogeny here now unlike Andino rajini
where mountain building is constant
because of the offshore subduction zone
the mountain building in this region
will only be active as the continents
are colliding so root of Tom here is one
time step after the continents have come
together we should Mark this as being
inactive so this came together Ash or
this erogenous formed at 6 30. now my
sim ends at 600 so I'm just going to go
to 600 select the feature sometimes
there are multiple features to select
you'll have to repeat this process for
each of them copy geometry create
feature origenic belt next play Lady
same plate ID but beginning at this time
step so 600 600 and this was
Himalayan
600 next next and instead of putting it
in active Origins we're going to create
a new feature connection create and save
and we're going to save this feature
collection as
former erogenes all right
return cool and now take the old feature
the once active feature go to edit
feature controller command e and then
set that to end at this time step again
you should go for a full 50 million
years I'm only going 30 because that's
the end of the simulation okay and let's
find former Raj disappear and let's move
it below actor orogenes
total down the drop down arrow go to
fill polygons set draw style and this
time choose feature age and set it to
monochrome and hit close and what this
does is it makes the feature black when
it's starting off and it gradually fades
it to white as it Ages which is cool
because this is no longer active it is a
former erogeny so erosion takes over and
begins to grind down the mountain range
so we can visually see that happen
now the only issue is that once you get
to 450 million years old this feature
gets to 450 billion years old it will
Snap Back to Black
for reasons I don't understand I don't
know why G plates does this fortunately
this isn't too much of a problem because
after like literal half a billion years
of erosion basically any mountain range
is going to be ground down to flatland
the roots of the mountain Mage like the
underlying tough Rock would still exist
and could later still be uplifted so
it's worth keeping track of it so what
we're going to do is we're going to go
to the point where this changes to Black
so if this was created at 600 and it
flips after 450 million years for the
sake of demonstrating purpose we'll then
go to 150 million years where it flips
select the feature which is remarkably
tricky to do when the feature is itself
white but I think that's it selected
copy geometry to digitize tool create
new feature aurogenic belt next play the
D300 cool this will begin life at 150
but we'll keep the dating here because
the original mountain building event was
at 600 million years ago we'll go next
next and then new feature collection
create and save and save this new
feature collection as old erogenies
and we will take the old erogenes layer
yeah and put it above active Informer
and of course we mentioned that you can
Rift these things apart at a later date
so you'd split the features using the
copy geometry digitize tool just like we
did in not the first video maybe the
second video of this series which has
already been covered and that I think is
everything
one needs to know about mountain
building
about orogeny I suppose last thing to
talk about is that the four categories
of rajini and the naramide URL in
Himalayan like these aren't like
distinct points or distinct categories
that the whole thing is basically a
Continuum and it's worth bearing that in
mind like sometimes you can have
situations where you're like oh is it
URL is it Himalayan I don't know if
you're aware that there's a spectrum
there a Continuum then you should be
okay we didn't have a chance to put down
any Laramie origins in in this Sim so
Rocky style orogeny as you might imagine
from looking at the Rockies all entails
is creating a thicker
band of mountains and again remember it
occurs if the subluction is particularly
Rapid or and most often go with this
option if a mid-ocean ridge is sucked in
oh wait hold on wait a minute having
said that having said that
where's the
mid-ocean ridge getting soaked in oh but
it misses the
red ocean ridge gets sucked in here so
it like it misses
it misses the constant shame and what
you can do because imagine a ridge is
coming in hot here and it deforms a
bunch of land way Inland of what we'd
expect with Andy and rajni that
deformation will stop once the mid-ocean
ridge has fully subducted
so you can set like the inner portion of
a laramide style rajini to be a former
erogeny and keep this one active if
there's still subduction zone there but
doing so follows on from the principles
already outlined in this video okay as
is customary time for an outro time
lapse once again thank you so much for
watching folks we are very nearly done
with this series I think it's another
two three videos perhaps and then I get
to unveil artifexia like the actual
world I am so excited thanks for
everything pasta thanks to vangu
Vanguard thanks to you for watching
thanks to the patrons y'all are
beautiful beautiful nerds until next
time
it grows
whoops I forgot a thing sorry it's me
it's me again
uh all the Roger knees turn around the
drop down menu uh fill polygon Seth roll
style single color white perfect now
we're done until next time it grows
foreign