# GPlates: Large Igneous Provinces & Hotspots - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 18

good morning interweb War Builders log
18. today we are going to drop in some
large igneous provinces and some hot
spots in the simulation but first let's
get a bit of background in fogon so
large igneous provinces shown in purple
on this map are basically just really
big regions of sustained volcanic
activity plumes of hot rock rise up
through the mantle break through the
crust at various points and inundate a
region that is like hundreds of
thousands of square kilometers to
millions of square kilometers in size
they require every say 10 to 20 million
years they concur on the land or in the
ocean though when it comes to the same
we're only worried about the ones on
land and they're briefer events than
mountain building events and as to what
they look like think of them kind of
like hot spots but just like Mega hot
spots on a much bigger scale
in fact hot spots on the top of this
later oftentimes either are remnants of
or precursors to large igneous provinces
when they're active like when all the
volcanism is popping off the region
would look kind of like Iceland except
again much bigger volcanoes explosive
volcanoes fusive volcanoes fissure vents
that kind of jazz when they're inactive
so when you have a former large igneous
Province the landscape will look a lot
like the Siberian traps or say the
Deacon traps here in India this sort of
region here and what's going on here is
that the sustained volcanic activity
builds up a large plateau of mafic rock
which can remain as elevated ground for
several millions of years even after the
volcanic activity has shut off and these
petals can be hundreds of meters if not
several kilometers high with the highest
portions forming in regions that
underwent the most intense sustained
volcanic activity and in fact the
Siberian traps shown here with black
line they formed I think it's about 250
million years ago and we still see these
large Highland plateaus going on so the
effects of a large igneous performance
can hold for a long time so to find the
two things you need to come over is
where we place these large igneous
provinces and what effects they have
Beyond just you know terrain building in
terms of placement large igneous
provinces go in basically two places one
in or around any major rifting event
particularly super continent breakup and
you can see here with the central
Atlantic magmatic Province camp for
short this is basically a big giant
large igneous Province and it Formed
just before Pangea broke up so major
rifting events consider putting large
igneous provinces there also larger
Japanese provinces can just occur
randomly so every so often it's worth
just plopping one down just for the hell
of it and if you're running say an 850
to a billion year Sim I would say about
maybe six to ten large igneous Province
style events will be about adequate and
finally effects so again you got the
plateaus but also so much volcanism is
going to cause mass extinctions like
these are massively destructive events
but interestingly not every large
igneous Province will trigger a mass
extinction and we can use a little bit
of artistic license to pick and choose
which ones will in general the bigger
the larger in this province the more
likely it is to cause a mass extinction
and to be clear like all of them will
cause extinctions the question is
whether or not their cause mass
extinctions which are different things
and if you're interested in learning
more about large igneous provinces
Beyond this admittedly extremely short
introduction to them I would check out
the most dangerous type of eruptions
flood volcanism explained by facts In
Motion I think this is a really cool
video go check them out alright with the
background info done let's drop them in
so what you should do is go through time
step by time step every 50 million years
and decide whether or not you want a
large igneous Province to occur though
they are associated with supercontinent
breakup I tend not to drop them in as
part of the first supercontinent breakup
just because it's so far in the past and
for another reason we'll touch on in a
second so I'm going to go for the time
step go to 950.
we'll go forward again we'll go to 900.
okay so here we have a rifting event so
I will be inclined to put one in here so
to do this I step backwards 10 million
years so in this case to 910 hit G on
the keyboard and I'll just draw in
like just a random looking shape
something like like that say
s on the keyboard you get a measurement
this is almost 400 000 square kilometers
so not as big as they can get but more
than acceptable G on the keyboard create
feature this is going to be shock horror
a large igneous Province an extensive
region of basalts resulting from flood
Basalt falconism plate ID well this
whole stick here is following 300 in The
Sims sold 300 beginning time that is 9
10. an ending time I'm going to put 900
so we're saying that the large against
province is only active for 10 million
years again these are shorter events
than orogeny and then we go name we'll
call it large igneous Province and give
it a date 9 10. next next and then we're
going to create a new feature collection
I'm going to save this feature
collection as
active large igneous provinces cool
active and very nice Edgar well played
you know what I mean so I'm going to
Triple down the drop down arrow here go
to fill polygon set draw style single
color and just give it some random color
something that is evocative of a
volcanism let's say an orange color and
go close and just for a thing that's
about to happen I'm going to drop the
opacity momentarily down to I don't know
0.5 cool so let's step our simulation
forward to the point where the large
igneous province is no longer active
which would be here 900 and what we're
going to do now is we want to copy the
geometry of the large igneous Province
and make a feature for former large
igneous provinces so I'm going to go f
on the keyboard select the area copy
geometry to digitize tool now I know
that these contents are about to split
so I'm going to make one copy on this
side of the continent another copy on
the other side of the content so they
can go their separate ways so I on the
keyboard
I'm going to exert some points here and
then you know the deal same as before
we create feature large igneous Province
next plate ID so the player ID is going
to be 200 this time because it's going
to go with green it's going to begin
life at 900 so after the volcanic
activity concludes and we can say it
continues into the distant future but
we'll keep the dating here we'll keep
910 here so we know when it first
happened so we go next next and then
we'll create new feature collection
create and Save
this feature collection as former large
igneous provinces and go save all right
and then we're going to go to former
barge ignis provinces in the layers
panel twiddle down the drop down arrow
fill polygons set draw style single
color will make it orange again
and we will drop the opacity say not
0.25
and then I'm going to bring the opacity
back up on the active ones larger
igneous Province appears lasts for about
10 million years splits
and then we have the former ones here no
longer active but again they will have
produced Highland regions so the
methodology is akin to how we did
orogeny in the previous episode now
recall in the last episode we set up a
layer called old erogenies that's where
we put any features that were older than
about 450 million years the idea being
that those features would have been
ground flat but they could be uplifted
later through various orogenic processes
there's no need to do that with large
igneous provinces after about 450
million years any Highland regions here
will just be ground Flash and they're
not often uplifted again in the same way
that erogeny is so I will just leave it
as active lips or active in lips and
former lips okay and just for the crack
let's put in another one so again I'm
going to go through the time steps and
find the location where I want to drop
in a large igneous province
I don't think I classed this a major
Roofing event so let's now put one there
okay I'm gonna pop one here because I
want to demonstrate something with hot
spots later on I think our Sim ended at
600 correct yeah it ended at 600 so I'm
gonna go to 650 and I'm just gonna dump
a large igneous Province here notice
also say a Riften event that could be
one of the random ones that show off so
let's back it up 10 million years G on
the keyboard same stick again
is 201 began life at 660 ends 10 million
years later 650 lip
660. next next and don't put into
activen large igneous provinces
for 10 million years F on the keyboard
select the feature copy geometry create
feature larger Japanese Province begins
life after it's active salt 650 in this
case goes on to the distant future and
again important it will keep the dating
here to remind us of when it initially
began next next I'm gonna put that in
former large igneous provinces
cool all right and that is basically it
go through time step by time step drop
in large igneous provinces as you see
fit biasing them towards rifting events
but also some random ones thrown in just
for the fun of us have about six to ten
and don't worry about any ones that
would occur in the ocean because
remember we said they occur every 10 to
20 million years lots of stuff will
happen in the ocean we're only American
what's happening on the land Lara jig in
these provinces done let's talk hotspots
all right hot spots hot spots are
isolated volcanic events or instances of
volcanism that occur independent of
plate boundaries usually most volcanism
occurs at plate boundaries hot spots
need not examples will be Hawaii here or
rather the entire Hawaiian island chain
Iceland could be viewed as an example
though I think some people class at a
large ignis Province and Yellowstone
might be another example so it follows
then the hot spots can occur in the
ocean or on land
and in general they can kind of occur
anywhere on the globe like you could
just put them down at random and chances
are you're fine though again there are
biases and preferences here number one
good place for Hotspot is at the center
of old supercontinents because remember
supercontinents break apart because man
the plumes come up and fractured across
well we've got a mantle plume you got a
hot spot Situation Number Two directly
on the opposite side of the globe from
old supercontinents is another great
place to put hotspots in or around
rifting events in general another good
place
and in any areas where the crust is weak
so in regions of slab rollback see the
first video of this g-plate series for
more on that in and around mid-ocean
ridges uh plate triple Junctions is not
a good place or in and around failed
riffs but really if you just want to
Chuck them down at random you're good oh
and also recall from the large against
Province section hot spots can be
precursors or remnants of large igneous
provinces so also in and around them and
I'm sure we're all aware of this but
when they form in the ocean you get the
island chain stuff we talked about
mantle plume Rises breaks true to crust
Builds an island on a plate that is
moving So eventually that Island will
move away from the hot spot so it will
stop growing erosion will take over and
it will grind its way down and a new
island will form over the hot spot so on
and so forth so you end up with a chain
of Big Island smaller Islands smaller
Island all the way down until the
islands have been so eroded that they
are just sea mounts or sea stumps and
these chains can be la like thousands of
kilometers long okay it's think that's
everything on Hotspot so let's go back
into G plates and start dropping them in
oh sorry two more things so firstly hot
spots don't tend to persist for very
long one to 200 million years is about
the Max and the landforms hot spots
create also don't tend to hang around
very long after the hotspot is inactive
so that implies that there's no real
Point dotting in hotspots throughout the
entire simulation only in the last say
three to four time steps before your
present day so for me that would be if
present day is 600 anywhere between 800
and 600 would be my Hotspot window and
the second thing is don't put them in at
every single time step of 50 million
years think in smaller increments here
thinking increments of 10 million years
so I'm going to just for the hell of it
go back say 60 million years to like 660
for example and I am going to switch to
orthographic View and I'm going to drop
a hotspot in we'll say here just because
although I believe this is in and around
the center of your supercontinent
somewhere here
let's go hearsay okay M on the keyboard
and the tree just click that is it that
easy create feature we're looking for
Hotspot
location in the mantle linked with high
igneous activity hit next now for plate
ID we don't want to give it a player ID
of anything that's moving because the
mantle plume this boil here is static
the plate moves over but it remains in
the same place so the plate ID we
reserved for static objects was Place ID
1. beginning time we'll say 660. we'll
go into the distant future and we'll
call this hotspot
660. then go next next I'm going to
create a new feature collection create
and Save
and save that as hotspots we'll go over
the hotspots here twiddle down the drop
down menu and you can set draw style
changes color because that doesn't
really blue doesn't really stick out
very much so let's say um
red
yeah
red is volcanic let me go close so next
thing we want to do is we want to Mark
the path of the plate over this hotspot
basically like figure out where the
island chain will be so hit F on the
keyboard select the hotspot go to copy
geometry to digitize tool hit M then go
down to create feature and we're looking
for motion patch tracks absolute plate
motion over time hit next now for plated
you want to give it the plate ID of the
plate that it is currently over so this
is 101 if I recall correctly relative
player ID leave it at zero beginning
time is 660 correct and this would be a
hotspot
Trail let me go next then we go add this
process is much the same as adding floor
lines
from 660 to zero in increments of 10
insert 660 to zero wonderful hit okay
then next and then new feature
collection boy we're making a lot of
feature collections today create and
save and save that feature collection as
hotspot
trails and go save and now assuming
we've done opening record or let's
change some colors here so hotspot
Trails twiddle down the drop down menu
go to set draw style and then go single
color again something volcanic uh yeah
let's go orange again and we'll go
create and also let's move hotspots
above hotspot Trails wonderful okay so
what we have now is we've marked our
hotspot and as we progress through the
Sim we'll see a line appear
emerging from the hotspot with each of
these little arrows here being
indicators of 10 million years and we
play this forward
it'll give us where that island arc
would be so but again over the hot spot
you'll have the newest youngest Island
and then increasingly further away
you'll have more and more eroded Islands
to the point where at the end here you
probably have a bunch of C mounts or sea
stumps all right and that believe it or
not is hot spots done that is all you
need to know about marking them in G
plates super super easy but we did say
we put in this random large igneous
Province let's use as an excuse to show
Remnant hotspots we go to 650 and just
as this is turning off we'll hit M on
the keyboard or becoming inactive rather
and let's drop in a hotspot now if
you're only aware of Hawaii as a hotspot
thing it's easy to think of them as just
being like a single point through the
mantle but you can totally get a cluster
of the hot spot so let's do that let's
just put in
a little cluster like that all right we
go to create feature we want hotspot
plate ID again hotspots are immovable
they are static the plate moves over
them so we'll give it a static plate ID
of one beginning time 650 sure and this
is gonna be
hotspot 650. next next and we'll put
that into hotspots and we'll go great
done F on the keyboard select those hot
spots which is just very difficult to do
when your mouse is giant like mine so
select your hotspots go to copy jump
treat digitize tool create feature this
time we're looking for like last time
motion path we put in the play ID the
hotspot is under so that will be 201 in
this case this purple stuff relative
plated is zero begins at 650 cool and
this is a hot spot Trail next
add some time so again begins at 650 so
we put in 650 insert 650 to zero perfect
hit okay
next and we'll put it in hotspot Trails
angle create and again if we just play
the simulation we should hopefully see
nice Trails happening very nice
so we're in a cool situation where we
kind of have we'll have like a trail of
dormant volcanoes here
from when the hotspot was underneath
that portion of the land so like here
a nut Trail makes its way into the ocean
and then we kind of have a more
traditional Hawaii like chain happen
right that is that did I forget I don't
think I've forgotten anything I think
that is literally that short and sweet I
guess
in the next episode we're going to talk
topologies and hopefully how to export
and make videos
Etc as always thanks to World building
pasta whose methodology this is thanks
to Wenger Van Gogh resin artist here
over in artifexia thanks to all of you
for watching and massive massive thanks
to all the patrons who helped support
the show I really really truly
appreciate it have a good one and until
next time
Ed girls