# World Reveal: An 850 Million Year History - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 21

good morning interweb world Builders log
21. today's the day we've all been
waiting for it is time to do a world
reveal so I think the best way of doing
this is to just play the simulation in
full uninterrupted and then we'll do a
Blow by blow detailed breakdown of
what's going on throughout the history
of this planet so let's get started
foreign
how cool is that once again massive
massive tanks to World building pasta
for putting this together for me I gave
him a pretty strict brief on what I
needed this world to do we'll talk about
it later and he executed it just
beautifully so pleased with this
everyone go check him out links in
description so let's do the blow by blow
back to the start of the simulation so
although the simulation begins at 2000
million years ago the modern world is at
11 50. so it's an 850 year simulation
850 million years ago there was a
supercontinent it looked like this a
general thing to be aware of is that a
major rifting events usually caused
planet to warm and sea levels to rise
whereas major collisional events usually
cause the planet to cool and sea levels
to fall so prior to this point we'd
expect the planet to be fairly cold and
as soon as this really substantial
rifting event occurs we'll expect the
planet to generally warm over time total
surface area of the supercontinent is
about 26 percent which is great because
through the accumulation of Island arcs
Etc throughout the simulation will
hopefully get close to our 29 30 that
we're aiming for we'd also expect there
to be large against provinces associated
with this Rift but again they happen so
far in the past that they have basically
no relevance to Modern geography so
they're not marked in so as we scroll
forward we get that initial Rift
and 50 million years later we get a
secondary Rift splitting our
supercontinent into three chunks this
fella is going to go south this Fella's
gonna go east and this Fella's gonna go
west and that motion basically just
continues until we get to 1860.
and at 1860 we get our first large ignis
province of nose it's going to be a
precursor to another rifting event it's
on the small side so it may or may not
lead to a substantial Extinction it
might also cause a bit of a cold snap
perhaps forming glaciers over the
southern mountain ranges here but once
this Rift opens up would expect the cold
snap to subside and we'll go back to
warming again
so at 1850 we see that the rift has
opened up and the reason why it's opened
up is that this subduction zone here
along the southern continent is putting
pressure on this side of the Eastern
continent to like break off and if we
switch to orthographic view we can see
that better
so all of this section here is like
sucking stuff in and it's putting
pressure on this so the rift opens and
then eventually this trap is going to be
sent off this way
at 1800 we can kind of see the beginning
stages of the next supercontinent
forming this trap here is going to smash
into him this trap here is going to
smash into him and then those two bits
are going to come together to help
achieve that a subduction zone is opened
here which is going to suck in
everything to the north here a creating
land Building mountains wonderful again
it's easier to see in orthographic View
all of this here is just going to get
sucked in
to this subduction zone and it'll draw
this continent into this continent
so we can see mountain building
occurring here also this ocean crossed
on this side is quite old it's about 250
million years old so seduction Zone
opens up here and it splits off this new
ocean place
so at 1740 we got another large Japanese
Province much bigger than the previous
large ignis Province so it could cause a
more substantial Extinction and where
the last ignis Province likely caused a
cold snap this will cause like a more
persistent period of cooling
particularly because we got just this
giant land mass here over the pole at
this stage and also this mountain range
up here in the polar zone would expect
to see glaciation here as well
so at 1700 this content here has fully
smashed into our polar continent and as
a result of that Collision a piece of
this content broke off and kind of moved
to the side here forming kind of like an
interesting Continental shape we got
another Rift happening here to break
apart this section sending it lightly up
this way and we also have a new
subduction zone opened here which will
encourage this continent to move closer
to this continent because again the
whole point is we're not just randomly
moving stuff we're trying to form break
apart and then reassemble
supercontinence
and as this continent moves northwards
it's going to suck in this mid-ocean
ridge so we're going to end up turning
this mountain range into a Rockies style
mountain range with laramide rajini and
we're well on the way to our two
Northern continents really colliding
so at 1650 we got a new subduction zone
opening here again to deal with old
ocean crust in this ocean here we also
have a new oceanic plate forming at the
triple Junction of these three oceanic
plates think of this as being like a
Pacific analog and our two Northern
continents have fully come together it's
a complicated Collision that involves
lots of Island arcs and various plate
boundaries being smoshed together so
this is definitely going to be a
Himalayan style erogeny going on
we're going to get some pretty rapid
subduction of these mid-ocean ridges
here so again we have another Rockies
occurring up this direction
and then at 1600 we've basically
reformed our supercontinent
we're back to having one giant landmass
bolt Collision options here again are
fairly complex because again there's a
bunch of Island arcs wrapped up in the
Collision so these would be kind of
intermediate URL to Himalayan style
erogenies total land area of this
supercontinent is about 28 that of the
entire planet so we've gained two
percent over the course of the evolution
thus far we got a rift opening here
which is going to drag this section of
the super consonant just closer into the
heart compacting a little bit and we
also have a rift opening here which is
going to drag these little bits up here
we got a large ignis Province forming
here again intermediate size may or may
not cause a big Extinction depending on
our timeline and how we want to play it
and this chap is going to be a precursor
to a futuristic event though a very very
early precursor to it and as is the case
with most supercontinents you got a
whole bunch of land together so the
interior is going to be quite dry
especially given that we have lots and
lots of coastal Mountain ranges kind of
closing off the interior of a good chunk
of the continent and the large igneous
Province could exacerbate that dryness
as well
so over the next 50 million years
between 600 and 1550 the supercontinent
basically just kind of sits this bit
here begins to complete its Collision
over here the little chunks here get
closer to an impact to the north and
there's also a new Rift that opened up
that will send this trap on its way what
I think is just really lovely these
really long uh subduction zones through
the ocean just lead to these cool long
island arc chains really fun lots of new
land being created to accrete to
increase the land area of our planet now
at this point we should probably talk
about the requirements I I gave War
willing pasta the first one was that I
wanted the world to have an America's
analog that is two bits of content
across that were in contact at one point
broke apart and then later reassembled
Allah North and South America this Rift
here is creating our South America
analog so just keep an eye on that as we
move forward
at 1510 we got I think our biggest large
igneous Province thus far so almost
certainly something will happen there
Ori extinctions it's going to be a
precursor to fully rifting apart the
supercontinent and just like before we'd
expect the climate to warm here also we
got a bunch of like really nice shallow
Seas going on which is kind of cool and
it's around about this time possibly a
little bit earlier that
um I want the invasion of land to occur
so this is kind of a good condition for
it to do so in and around
1510 give or take maybe 50 million years
either side the exact date I've yet to
pinpoint we will get to that internet
don't worry
so at 1500 this continent here has
um completed the first part of its
Collision it's going to continue
smashing into here I think and these
little bits of Island arcs here have
begun to collide which are South America
analog we also have a new Rift opening
up that's going to split our
supercontinent into three chunks this
chunk here this trunk here and then this
chunk here and again for these chaps
intermediate these are Rajan is here
intermediate between Ural and Himalayan
I think
so 1470 we got a subduction of mid-ocean
ridge here likely laramide orogeny
occurring here but just a relatively
brief one
at 1460 we got another large against
Province occurring in the southern
portion here quite small possibly won't
trigger a substantial Extinction but it
will cause rifting of this Southern
continent now another one of the
requirements I asked of whirlpooling
pasta was to create an Australia analog
and that is a section of continental
crust that is and has been for a good
deal of time isolated from the rest of
the continents and that is going to be
this chap here so we got South America
here we got Australia here and spoilers
this section here is going to be North
America
our Rift opens up climate warming
splitting apart this Southern continent
we'll get some more laramide stuff
happening up here as all of these
mid-ocean ridges are getting subducted
and note that this specific analog that
we've been growing is now going to be
gobbled up here here
Etc
so at 1400 we get another quite large
Rift again warming which is going to
send our North America analog over to
meet South America this continent here
has finally completed its collision and
again very complicated so we're going to
end up with a Himalayan style rajini
going on there and it's about to get
more complicated as this microcontinent
is going to slam into here as well and I
believe that is the final Rift of notes
in the simulation because we got all of
the constituent parts that I wanted
again North America South America
Australia so the end times are upon us
in terms of simulation
1380 we got a very large against
province that one almost indisputably
will trigger some sort of mass
extinction and also just a general
cooling of climate prickly because a lot
of our mid-ocean ridges are being
subducted away lots of mountains are
beginning to form glaciers Etc and we
also had a bunch of Aging cross going on
at the moment as well so sea levels will
fall so this could be an interesting
little Epoch in our planet
microcontinent collides giving even more
complicated erogeny here new subduction
zones open to encourage South America
here to just really slam into North
America and again just note that this
chap has been a big island continent for
a long long time and will continue to do
so it is like Mega Australia Australia
on steroids
1310 sees another random large igneous
Province not associated with rifting at
all very small likely won't cause too
much trouble
now here with another Rift opening and
that is a consequence of again
subduction zone subduction zones cause
everything if we look at autographic
view we see that we have a big old
subduction zone along this continent
here and that's putting pressure on this
Central continent so a rift opens and
then this trap is going to be sent this
way
hard to see what's going on here but
there's gonna be laramide style erogeny
along here just because of how quick
this continent has been moving West so
it's rapidly subducting the oceanic
crust beneath it so we're going to end
up with Rockies along this Coast at this
point
so at 12 50 North America has slammed
into South America or broader I guess it
would be the other way around South
America was speeding towards North
America something that quick is
definitely going to result in Himalayan
originally going on here for sure
nope we also have a trapped sort of
section of ocean crossed here we'll talk
about that at the end this is a major
Collision it's also major collisioning
happening more or less in the polar zone
so again we'd expect climate to cool
here a little bit after a brief warming
period post this Rift occurred a couple
of time steps ago
now instantly I didn't ask for this but
we've kind of got a micro Australia
going on here as well it's been
separated from other landmasses for a
while although not half as long as this
trap here so we kind of got like two
Australians and I should have mentioned
earlier but worth noting that our
America's analog here is far more like
latitudinal than the Americas is because
like the Americas on Earth runs like
more or less north to south whereas our
Americas is running at least this upper
trunk here is running like Eurasia more
or less west to east which if you're a
believer in Guns Germs and Steel can
lead to just a whole bunch of fun stuff
happening there we got more laramide
stuff about to happen here as this
mid-ocean ridge is going to get sucked
into this chap here we got another small
ish large ignis Province again may or
may not cause a substantial Extinction
we can just play it by ear and then we
proceed into the final time step and
into our modern world
thank you
and you can kind of see how the next
Super content is going to form like this
trap is going to collide with this it's
going to collide with this this whole
conglomeration white head north and meet
up at the back end of this chap Etc so
you can kind of see a future to the
world as well which is just dope here we
have the break off of what is like Japan
style analogues we got a back Arc Basin
here see previous videos that I made in
the series and they're sort of Trapped
little semi-trap little ocean going on
here we also have a last minute Rift
here which is really great that we're
building Pastor did that because recall
that the sort of like air called natural
state of the world given its setup is to
be quite cold and I wanted to be more
like modern day Earth so it's good that
we have this kind of rifting event going
on that we can just like hand wave the
temperature up to uh modern Earth
temperatures give or take so that's
really cool it is so young this rifting
event that we were likely not actually
see this uh content Rift apart it will
likely just be like the rift valley in
Africa which is pretty cool and we'll
talk about that in a second once we do a
breakdown of uh what are the interesting
things for each of the continents now
hot spots I haven't talked about hot
spots we got a random assortment of hot
spots some occurring in the middle
plates some occurring in around
mid-autumn ridges but the interesting
one would be over here let me switch to
orthographic where are you my friend
here we go we have this collection of
hot spots meeting up with this mid-ocean
ridge so therefore we can come from the
place an Iceland analog over here which
is pretty cool so in terms of modern
geography this Northern continent here
the Himalayan orogeny that occurred in
the center here will likely be eroded
away to a degree it would still be a
prominent mountain range but not like
you're not going to get a bunch of
everests here and you can see that with
the coloration we'll also end up having
nice fjording going on all along here
this trapped ocean it's been trapped for
a long time so likely it'll become
filled in with sediment to a degree but
it is so large that like we could fill
most of it in and still end up with a
trapped Inland Sea that's like 1.5 to
maybe two three times the size of the
Caspian Sea so we can get a real
giant Inland Sea up here which is cool
and also this could be an indoor League
Basin and for those who don't know
that's a um Basin where water can drain
into it but it can't flow out of it and
you can see that because it's encased in
kind of
mountains or x-mountains and the only
way for water to leave would be through
evaporation so it's pretty dope and I
think it's a pretty cool branding
feature of this Northern continent what
else would this guy oh yeah these
islands here these are hella old they're
like 400 million years old so we'll get
like
um Indonesia style formations here
possibly fusing with the mainland but in
any case like big island arcs like big
big island darks so that's that's really
fun the Australia content so like I said
we'd likely end up with a uplift Plateau
here ala the rift valley in Africa this
partially enclosed sea again we could
fill in some of it as well with sediment
again depending on where we are in terms
of land coverage percentage for our
microcontinent here again this trapped
in and see thing will almost definitely
be filled in with like low-lying
sedimentary planes possibly a nice Bay
might occur here but I wouldn't expect
it to really look like this in the
modern world and again we have some old
Island arcs here that we need to flesh
out and make bigger I don't think they'd
be quite Indonesia style like this but
still fairly substantial and finally our
Southern continent squarely parked on
the pole so we'd expect some glaciation
we may need to hand wave some of the
temperatures here because it's not
screaming Hot House world at me
um to get us up to that 15 degrees so
but it's fine we don't need to worry
about worst case scenario we'll just do
climate zones indicative of uh what they
were during the last glacial maximum but
we'll see down the road in any case
Southern continent ice caps glaciation
over these mountain ranges for sure Etc
there's a teeny little bit of an ocean
left here little trapped ocean that is
so small that I think that's just gonna
be totally filled in with sediment oh
and the other thing to note here in both
our America's analog and in this
Southern continent and there are loads
of chunks here that are encased in
mountains say particularly this one here
again can lead to an extremely dry
interior so it might be worth leveraging
the power of some of these failed riffs
and just breaking apart the mountain
ranges and reshaping the coastline bit
to allow a bit of water to get in here
and
um moisten things up a bit again that
will be that would be the case for
Northern content and in the southern
continent in orthographic view we can
see that a little bit better
so we have like for example here we're
encased in mountains so this would be
extremely dry if we don't want that
again we can break open some of these
Mountain chains all right I think that's
everything I think it's everything I
guess the last thing to do just for your
viewing pleasure if you so desire I
might just finish the video playing
through the simulation with just the
plates turned on so you can see the
evolution of the actual plates
themselves and then we should all sort
of play a simulation true with ocean
crust I'll do that one first because it
takes a little bit of explaining if I
turn on the ocean uh I don't want
spoilers oh let's not do spoilers let's
just move it back here we'll turn on
some awesome crust you can see here this
looks really wonky and the way World
building pasta has done this
um is to have this extant ocean crossed
layer so it will place in
any and all awesome cross that makes it
to the modern world everything else is
just not gonna be included it's going to
look really weird at the start but then
it'll all come together at the end so uh
let's do that let's first go for one
full Sim uh showing what happens to the
ocean crust
thank you
thank you
so there we go a psychedelic map of what
the oceans are doing red being the
younger sections of ocean cross and I
think pink here being the absolute
oldest okay and the final animation
before we go today is going to be just a
plate animation let's see how our plates
evolved over time
foreign
foreign
and that's how the plates evolved if by
counting is correct that's 10 kind of
major plates that exist in the world
okay so that is that next time we talk
we're gonna be working on these Island
arcs here and just editing the uh
terrain getting it closer to its final
uh modern State and then we can start to
look at climate maps and all that good
stuff as always thank you for watching
thanks to all the patrons who support
the Show links in description and again
a massive massive thanks to World
building pasta this is some just some
seriously awesome work I am privileged
to be able to collaborate and work with
such skilled people so until next time
Edgar house
thank you
foreign
foreign