# World Map: Islands - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 22

good morning interweb world Builders log
22. We are continuing to build out our
fictional Universe in this video we're
going to look at adding detail to some
Island arcs and hot spots in our modern
world but first quick PSA the reference
dock it is no longer what I've done is
I've transferred all of that info and
put it onto a dedicated website it's a
lot neater this way I think
artifactscene.com links in description
go check it out there's some new updated
artwork plus like a whole bunch of
little Easter eggs in there go check it
out I think it's worse artifactscene.com
so Island arcs hotspots in order to save
a bit of time and to reduce the amount
of on-screen G plates I did a fair bit
of work off camera so this is the state
of the world as we'd left it last time
and here are the updates
I'll just bounce back and forth so you
can get a feel
very subtle but I think important stuff
some notable additions here are Iceland
up at this little hot spot region that
intersects with the middle ocean ridge
like that then there is this polar
Hawaii chain which I think is pretty
neat and then we have this Central large
island arc here which I I don't know if
I like this the more I look at it the
more I think that this island I actually
probably be smooshed onto this continent
here so it forms like a little horn
completely closes off uh this Bay Area
here I think I might do this off camera
maybe let me know what you think do you
like this island arc in the middle here
or do you think it should be glued onto
this continent now I didn't fill in all
of the island arcs this chap here is
still in its abstract form we'll fill
this in on video today and also this hot
spot here
has not been filled in and we'll do that
as well today just so you can see the
methodology should you wish to emulate
it okay so let's start working on this
hotspot recall that along a hotspot
Trail G plates places arrowheads every
10 million years therefore the closer
these arrowheads are together the slower
the plate is moving the further apart
they are the faster the plate is moving
knowing the plate speed is kind of
important because it could help inform
the morphology of the islands we create
at hot spots so what I'm going to do is
I'm going to hit s on the keyboard and
I'm just going to measure the distance
between two of the arrowheads here or
specifically the final two arrowheads
and I can see here that this is
246 kilometers
so I'm gonna pop over to this
spreadsheet I made and I'm going to
write here just in my notes column Pace
246. now it might be like hotspot D3
what the hell is that
I exported the map of air and gave it a
chessboard treatment this is the hot
spot we are working on and is located at
d
three so I basically just set up a
coordinate system to help me locate
these features so with this figure down
we can pop over here to this hotspot
speed chart I set up where I Define what
on this world is a slow moving place a
medium speed place or a fast moving
place the range here goes from 70 to 700
because the slowest moving of my plate
that has hot spots on them had our heads
spaced about 70 kilometers apart
and the fastest moving plates here this
chap had our heads are about 700
kilometers apart so based on absolutely
nothing but gut feeling I took that
range split into three and used that to
Define slow mid fast with the thought
here being that for slow moving plates a
given bit of place material would be
over a hot spot for a long time because
the plate is moving slowly therefore a
very large island will build up and
those large islands when they move off
the hot spot will take a long time to
roll down I.E they'll form a long chain
basically think kind of Hawaii
conversely on fast moving plates a given
bit of the plate will only very briefly
remain Over The Hot Spot thus only a
small island is formed and when that
small island moves off the hot spot
erosion will grind it down really
quickly because there's just not that
much material built up so we'd expect
small islands and no long chain so kind
of like an anti-hawaii and then for
medium speed plates it's just an
intermediate between these two extremes
and from there based on no kind of mats
just a survey of what the hotspot spots
on Earth are doing I set myself these
boundaries with a sort of theoretical
maximum here of about 15 000 square
kilometers for the entire island chain
because that's about what Hawaii is I
think Hawaii is like 16 000 square
kilometers all the islands factored in
okay so hopefully that makes sense now
again our Pace here the distance between
the arrows was two four six that puts us
firmly in the slow Camp so we're looking
at a big island Over The Hot Spot plus a
long chain five thousand square
kilometers plus four to six islands
wonderful so I'm gonna pop back into G
plates and I'm gonna get drawing
um
okay so there's some tentative shapes
what I'm gonna do now is f on the
keyboard select the feature s on the
keyboard for the measure tool and I am
going to copy these areas here and paste
them into this calculator which
basically just totals up the area so we
can see if we're in the range we want to
be ignore cross to add we'll talk about
that later that does a different thing
okay so we're two and a half thousand
square kilometers in total we need to
double that
okay one hot spot iron chain done Big
Island four to six islands in the chain
cool and our final tally here was 5 200
square kilometers so I'm going to copy
that and I'm gonna pop here to area
actual here and I'm gonna paste this in
which then Grays out this to tell me
that it's done I've imported that into G
plates okay hotspot done let's do an
island arc so we're gonna work on this
chap here that is island arc
5D I'm gonna put on my Island arcs layer
hit F on the keyboard I'm going to
select that and make a note of the fact
that it began at 1 600. next thing I'll
do is hit L on the keyboard I'm just
going to draw a line paralleling This
subduction zone
something kind of like that s on the
keyboard and find that the length of
that line is 4 345 kilometers back over
to the spreadsheet the length of the
island arc was four three four five
point zero seven nine zero
and formed at 1600 so that means we need
to add this amount across about a
million square kilometers so I am going
to copy that and I'm going to paste that
here into area Theory
and I got some conditional formatting
here to um highlight where most of the
crust is being added this is significant
because all the crossed added thus far
excluding the four major continents have
come to about 1.7 million square
kilometers
and this is about 1 million kilometers
on its own so what is that that's about
somewhere between 30 and 40 percent of
all the crust added at subduction zones
and Island arcs would be contained
within this island arc okay and then I'm
just going to over here clear this
because we'll need this to be free again
oh and for cross to add I am going to
tie this
to that figure
so we need to reference this figure so
that is how much cross we've left to add
it basically it's a checksum okay so how
are we going to do this I think I would
like just purely from Aesthetics to have
something up here hit the mainland
so I can take this mountain range and
just continue it on down through the
island arcs which I think it would be
fun and in general I think yeah Big
Island here just getting smaller as we
approach here but obviously that's going
to be informed by like what the tectonic
history is doing so I'm just going to
scroll back a little bit
Okay cool so here we can see that this
bit ocean ridge here is being subducted
kind of head on in this area
so I think
and we have subduction in the middle
ocean ridge the whole way up as well
yeah so I think that would imply there
needs to be a substantial Island here
and we want a substantial Island up
there and in the middle I think I'm
gonna let myself do whatever I want I
think that's justifiable all right
time-lapse mode engaged
foreign
okay tentatively something like that in
case you're wondering why I made some of
the decisions I made here I'm drawing
inspiration from Sumatra in Indonesia
where we have large islands you have
kind of these foreground Islands between
the supply chain Zone and the kind of
main big islands and then you also have
these kind of like behind the main
island Islands going on here as well so
I was kind of trying to mimic stuff like
that here background Islands
some anomalous things going on the sort
of the main
Arc happening here and then this
foreground Arc happening there now we
gotta go put in those areas and tweak
until we get to where we need to be
so we are about a hundred and fifty
thousand kilometers off which isn't too
bad so time-lapse mode re-engaged
detailing time
foreign
okay
I think that is the island arc done we
are about 5 000 square kilometers over
but that's Grand because this is only
approximation so I'm gonna take that
total copy and I'm gonna paste this into
Arc 5D actual and now we have a tally
for the totality of crossed added at hot
spots and island arc so just under three
million uh square kilometers and if we
assume the area of each of the
continents oh FYI
I did that by creating an area layer
which is basically just tracing the
consonants hitting F selecting that
layer hitting s and using that to gauge
the area of the whole shebang
if we assume that these areas remain the
same just for a second
we will get a total area of about 225
million square kilometers
which gives us
a land percentage of 31 and if we take
Earth's land coverage as being 29 that
means we're 2.5 over so we have again
assuming one of the goals is to have an
Earth-like land coverage we have 2.5
play Wish when it comes to eating into
the continents to create the modern
coastlines which will be the top
and darks hot spots done thank you so
much for watching I hope you enjoyed and
I hope you're looking forward to the
next video as much as I am so until next
time
Edgar house