# World Map: Continents - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 23

good morning interweb world Builders log
23 We are continuing to flesh out the
physical geography of our fictional
Planet here with the focus of this video
being finalizing our Continental
coastlines but first follow up I asked
you all in the last video should we keep
our mid ocean island arc or should we
slam it onto mini Australia here the
latter got unanimous support so I went
ahead and edited that off camera good
shout internet I think this looks better
also recall that plants on this world
are meant to be a kind of teal color so
let's color all finalized landforms in
teal like so all right coastlines recall
that these shapes here are not our final
continents what's shown in green here is
basically what's shown in red here that
is the shapes we have thus far show the
maximal extent of our Continental
shelves not our coastline so we're going
to take those shapes carve into them and
produce our final modern coastlines so
the first question to naturally ask I
think is how much can we cut into our
Continental shelves the basic rout of
thumb here is active thin passive thick
that is at active plate margins areas
where continents above plate boundaries
the continental shelf will be relatively
thin as demonstrated here by South
America but on passive margins areas
where continents do not directly AB a
plate boundary the continental shelf may
be relatively thick and again you'll see
that here in North America and down in
the south of South America it's not
always the case cuz you'll see it Africa
the continental shelf is very thin even
though it's on a passive margin or even
though it is a passive margin but that's
a kind of General Trend in terms of
numbers the Wikipedia page for
continental shelf states that the widest
most expansive shelf the Siberian shelf
is about 1 1 12,000 km in width with the
average extent of Continental shelves
being about 80 km now that seems to be
directly contradicted by the following
table where it says the average width is
about 57 km with a Max width of 778 so
I'm just going to go with what's stated
up here 80 average 1.5k Max so the basic
game plan is that along active margins
I'm barely going to cut into the
continent along passive margins I'm
going to cut in about 80 km I'll go a
little bit less if there are coastal
large ignes provinces or Coastal old
mountain ranges I'm going to assume that
The Rock there is a little bit tougher
so less erosion takes place if there are
failed Rifts I'm going to assume every
now and again that more erosion takes
place it'll give me an excuse to drop in
Bays Etc this like the last video is
going to be more art than science okay
so that's about it one last thing I'm
going to use this area layer that we had
from the previous video that I used to
measure the surface area of each of the
land masses I'm going to cut into this
layer and not the actual land masses
just because it's slightly more
non-destructive I'll time lapse through
this continent and then I'll cut to the
world done proper all right sit back
relax grab your popcorn time lapse mode
engaged
care
all right something like that decided to
go for like a Northwest Europe Vibe here
just cuz it adds to the messiness of
this area I think it looks cool I cut
loads into here cuz recall from a
previous video this entire section is
encased in mountains making the area
quite dry therefore anything we can do
to get a little bit extra moisture in is
a good call and finally I put in this
Lake here not entirely pleased with that
shape but its surface area is about what
I want it to be it's about 7 140,000
sare km which is about 50% bigger than
the caspan C so I'm going to take these
principles and apply them to the entire
globe and it should end up looking a
little something like this or if I
toggle off the continent color it might
be a little bit easier to
see next thing to do is to see where we
stand surface area wise so I am going to
select each of these areas hit s on the
keyboard copy the area value dump it
into spreadsheet add them all up and see
where we stand I will save you to tedium
and cut straight to the results so this
is everything totted up which means that
for my world as it currently stands we
have a total land coverage of about 216
million square kilm which means that
30.5% of the planet is covered in land
if we take earth's land coverage value
as being 29% we''ve about
1.51 5% left to kind of cut out cuz
remember one of the mini goals was have
the same land coverage percentage as
Earth and this is good this gives me a
little bit of wigger room to detail
things around the globe so we'll do
another quick time lapse and then we'll
see some final results
h
okay that I think is modern world done
well for the most part there's more
continental shelf to put underneath the
island ARs and our little Iceland analog
over here but I'll do that off air broad
Strokes Coast lines are done and our
final tally for land percentage came to
places to cut into things and I can't
really find any good candidates
remaining I think I've reduced as much
as I kind of feel comfortable doing but
as always let me know what you think if
you think there's something that needs
changing let me know in comments all
right that was that I believe next time
we see each other again internet uh
we're going to be talking topography
mountains all that beautiful Jazz thanks
middle folks for watching I hope you
enjoyed and I'll see you very soon until
next time
Ed grous