# World Map: Land Topography - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 24

good morning interweb world Builders log
24. today we're going to talk topography
we are going to take a map that looks
like this and turn us into something
that looks like this but first as always
we gotta do some follow-up from the
previous video first up the website has
been updated the continents now have
placeholder names Picard esri degra and
Janna no prizes for guessing where those
names are coming from next some people
notice that on esri here no fjords were
marked in in the North in the previous
video that is by Design fjords are an
absolute nightmare they will be done but
I'm just pushing them off for now next
quick clarification of what's going on
in Picard in the deep southern regions
here those that will likely be affected
by ice caps the coastlines don't
necessarily represent where the land
meets the sea rather where the fast ice
meets the sea and fast ice is ice that
secured something be it land or a
continental shelf what's going on
underneath this ice I'm not depicting or
in other words if you look at Antarctica
without the ice we're not depicting
something like this we're depicting
something more like this I slash land
continental shelf ice or land
continental shelf okay and the final
Point thanks for bearing with me I
promise we'll get to topography in a
second is that I found that just the
world's weirdest bug in the spreadsheet
and I cannot for the life of me figure
out how in the hell to fix it in the
apparent size and brightness tab in the
moon apparent size and brightness
section this cell the semi-major axis
cell has a bug associated with it that
is in my copy if I go to data data
validation you'll see here that the only
data validation in this sheet is this
column here atmosphere right note that
no data validation is applying to this
cell that's what's in my master copy but
for again reasons I cannot understand
any copy that's made from my Master Copy
apparently just creates data validation
there that prevents the user from using
this cell correctly and I I literally I
cannot fix this because it's just not
present in my master copy so everyone's
gonna have to fix this manually or some
spreadsheets font has to email me and
let me know what's going on and you do
this just to be clear you go to here you
go to data data validation you find in
the list here you find what validation
applies to the cell C60 I highlight it
and then just remove it really sorry
about this again it's just it's
inexplicable I do not know what's going
on all right it is time let's do some
topography okay first things first we're
going to export a map from G plates and
stick it into a vector based drawing
program like illustrator or inkscape I'd
recommend turning on your land layer
your continental shelf layer all your
rogenes largely these provinces hot
spots plate boundaries and also your
ocean cross layer with all that done
just like in previous videos your
reconstruction export single snapshot
instance use main window time click that
choose a directory go to add export and
we are going to go to projected
geometries we're going to choose SVG a
vector format constrain aspect ratio and
then make this you can make this as big
or small as you want its Vector it can
scale there's some raster stuff in here
so bigger is better let's just say 2500
but you could easily double or triple
that depending on what your computer can
handle so I'm going to go with that hit
OK and then I'm going to export hello
there folks editor Edgar here past Edgar
that guy was an idiot he totally forgot
to mention the most important thing you
have to export in rectangular projection
that's non-negotiable and an absolute
must because we're going to bounce back
and forth between illustrator and G
plates to help control for projection
Distortion and the only projection that
will allow us to do that is rectangular
projection I apologize for a few Steve
for the wrongs of past Edgar rest
assured he will be sanctioned
appropriately
so then we are going to open up that
file in illustrator I'm going to undock
my layers panel here for a second if you
don't see this panel go to Windows
layers angles here this image is
comprised of just a bunch of layers
we're going to need to tidy things up
here a little bit group like things get
rid of invisible layers and you should
be left with something like this one C
layer one ocean crossed age layer one
base map without topographical
information and then one layer for
everything else I'm gonna go Ctrl a to
select everything I'm gonna hit command
or Ctrl shift and G to ungroup
everything so now we have three
individual groups I'm going to go down
to this plus icon here make a new layer
I'm going to call this layer just like
guides and I'm gonna move
this topographic layer into guides I'm
going to select this icon here click to
Target it and I'm going to go up the top
here where it says opacity and I'll drop
the opacity down something like say
fifty percent
I'm gonna go to the plus icon here
create another new layer I'm going to
call this Tuple
this is the layer upon which we're going
to draw and I'm going to put that in
between my guides and my layer 1 here I
might just rename this as base for now
eventually when we come to the receipt
we'll move these around and create new
guide layers but for now this is all we
need and then I'm also going to hit a
new layer again and I'm going to call
this layer uh color wrap which we'll get
to in a second so four layers color ramp
guides your drawing layer and the stuff
you import I'm going to move my layers
panel back down here scoot this over
very good now next thing we have all
this white space here which is no good
so in illustrator you can go shift o to
bring up the artboard tool essentially
what is in the artboard will be exported
so I'm going to crop the artboard down
to the actual map so I'm just going to
crop this down hopefully this will snap
into place marvelous
perfect and we can just go back up to
our selection tool here to click off
that so the next thing we need to do is
we need to create our color ramp for our
topography so I am going I'm going to
lock all the other layers by clicking in
this empty space on the left here and I
am going to highlight the color ramp
layer and that's what we're going to use
so M on the keyboard this will draw a
shape to draw any old rectangular
looking thing something like that if you
go down to the corner here you'll see
two boxes the one that's filled in
that's your fill uh the one that's just
a contour that's your stroke so I'm
going to click on the fill color and I
am going to enter in some sort of green
color for land we'll say just as a
demonstration something like this will
say then I'm going to click and drag
this and while dragging hold option this
will create a copy and I'm also going to
hold shift so it stays parallel and I'm
just going to drag this out somewhere to
here I'm gonna highlight that double
click here
and choose some sort of color for like
mid-level mountains we'll say usually
this is kind of like a yellowy sort of
color let's say something like that okay
I'm gonna click that drag it hold option
and shift while doing so just drag
somewhere up here same thing again drag
option and shift I'll drag this out too
here keep this the same this I'm going
to change to some sort of like high
mountain color
again usually some sort of brown
let's say something like that drag alt
and shift
and then I'm going to choose some sort
of snow cap color
something like that low-lying elevations
medium high elevations high elevations
extreme elevations now what we'd like to
do is get a ramp of colors in between
each of these and illustrator has just a
baller tool to do this this is the blend
tool you can find it here or you can hit
W on the keyboard if you double click
the icon you'll bring up a menu here
blend options what we're looking for
here is specified steps and the question
we're asking is how many colors do we
want in between say these two colors
let's say I want
three for argument's sake keep this the
same hit OK and then with your blend to
a highlight it click one end of the
spectrum and then the other end of the
spectrum and illustrator will make a
gradient between the two colors you've
highlighted and the cool thing about
this is that you can like select this
one for example bring up its color and
if you change it to something mad like
this it'll automatically update right so
let's do the same thing up here with our
blend tool selected double click and for
this guy I'm gonna say we want two
colors in between our two out recorders
here the idea being that at lower
elevations you want more distinctions at
upper elevations you want less
distinctions so we go two and we go okay
we click one end of the spectrum and
another end and we get that Brill and
then up here double click the blend tool
let's say we only want one in between we
go Okay click click done
and from here we can make things look
pretty so for example we can hit a on
the keyboard select say this end of the
spectrum you gotta hit a it has to be
the direct selection tool select that
and then just shift and left Arrow to
close down the spaces something like
that do the same thing up here
V on the keyboard and then we'll drag a
selection around all of these up here in
the Align tools you can go Center Line
and then again click and drag
to line them up perfectly
one color ramp
to clear the reason why we did this in
three stages is this because we divided
up the Spectrum into low medium high
extremely high and draws different
intervals within each range all right
let's select that command G let's group
it up
perfect and if you notice in my map here
this is the color spectrum
I came up with
or rather I stole from Wikipedia got rid
of a few things and changed the base one
to a more teal color notice well the
exact same technique applies in getting
ocean colors so we have some elevation
Heights here so we need to figure out
how to get them the natural question to
ask I think would be how tall is stuff
in my world like we know that this one
here is from zero to something it begins
at sea level but where does this end
where does the Spectrum end so to do
this we'll pop into the world Smith
there's a new version out version
4.01 it's a major update because if you
go down to the button tab thing here go
over to tectonics we have a new sheet
here for figuring out
um tectonic related things again instead
of explaining this I'm just going to go
through it and hopefully it'll all make
sense when you see it in practice first
thing we need to do is enter in a
gravity value here on my planet that is
1.340 g the spreadsheet then will take
that information and compute a Max Peak
Heist for my world that is to say that
my world's Everest cannot be greater
than this value here this is a very
broad approximation so just take it as a
ballpark figure for what it's worth on
Earth a planet with one g the max Peak
height is 9.2 K and given that Everest I
think is 8.8 something that's a pretty
good approximation so even if some
tectonic features get close to this
range they'll be few and far between so
what I normally do all things being
equal is about a kilometer or two below
this value make that your upper color
ramp distinction so this is about seven
so we'll say about maybe five
all right and we know that this chap
here starts at zero meters and from here
what I usually do is I usually do every
100 meters
up until 200 then I go to 500.
then I go to a thousand
one five
two thousand and from there every
kilometer
so the idea is just like with the colors
at lower elevations we have more
distinctions and elevation ranges become
wider and wider as we proceed upwards
just because most of your Topography is
going to be at the bottom end of the
spectrum so we want more detail there
alright select everything command or
Control G one color ramp Dawn so now we
have our elevations we'd want to know
where we're going to place those
elevations so to demonstrate this I'm
going to work on the middle continent
here dagra and just pop it into
orthographic view let's zoom in on this
fella here and we do a little bit of
analysis we have along here an Andean
range which note will extend down
through the island arc we have here an
old erogeny that is likely ground flat
we have a large igneous Province and we
also have a thicker subduction zone
erogeny here probably laramide and also
we have deep black shades here which
means that the erogeny is active and we
have some more grayer shades which means
that the erogeny is inactive so it's a
rolling down and again this erogeny will
extend all the way down the island arc
here and up here sorry we'll also have
erogeny like Sumatra going on and the in
style so that's a little general
overview how about we start then
figuring out the elevations of this
Andean range just because I think it's
going to be the easiest so F on the
keyboard
select the Andean range and we see that
it began at 1300 so let's go back to 1
300.
and let's just have a quick glance
through its history
okay so that is pretty simple stuff it's
basically just a Andean range shots
history nothing complicated brilliant so
over to the spreadsheet and we ask
ourselves is the mountain range we're
looking at active
or is it inactive well it's black
therefore active but also we know it's
active because it's next to a subduction
zone so we'll pop up to our active
mountain range thing here we select the
type of mountain range we're dealing
with we are dealing with an Andean
Mountain Range
as you select different types the
spreadsheet will update and give you a
different cross section
of the mountain range you're dealing
with
Shout Out World building pasta I took
with permission some of the pictures
from his blog adapted them a little bit
for the spreadsheet so it's his original
work and FYI a lot of the data we're
going to hear is also pulled from World
building pasta but adapted for the
world's mesh so again Shout Out World
building pasta just the best world
building blog on the internet please go
check them out links in description all
right we have an Andean Mountain Range
excellent next we need to set is a
scaling Factor so basically what's going
to happen is that the topographical
features on your world are going to
scale with gravity specifically they are
going to scale by 1 over G to the power
of X where X here is this value that you
put in here the range here is between
one and two please don't go outside that
range it doesn't make a whole lot of
sense and also be somewhat close to two
because there's a thing called cowlers
Rule which states that in the solar
system topographic features scaled by
one over G squared I.E the scaling
factor is two but I've allowed some
customizability so 1.6 1.7 1.8 that sort
of thing I'm going to go with 1.7
all right and because we're dealing with
Andy and range we see that we have these
features going on an outer Arc Ridge so
basically a little pre-mountain chain a
four Arc Basin a slope up to a plateau
then a slope into a back Arc all pretty
self-explanatory oh and let me clear
these
so for each of these features here the
spreadsheet gives a suggested height
range and a suggested width range just
be careful the heights are in meters the
widths are in kilometers if the height
is ever suggested as being zero or at
least zero is a possibility that means
the feature can be at sea level or below
sea level it's up to you so an example
of a 4 Arc Basin is at zero you could
totally have a four Arc Basin that dips
down below sea level if zero is ever
suggested in the width range that
implies that the feature may not be
present at all so for example an outer
Arc Ridge that is not always present and
if you don't want it to be present
simply select zero so it's just simply a
case of looking at the ranges and
choosing something you like
then for the fourth slope you'll see the
suggested range is tapering and all that
means it goes from whatever height value
selected for your four Arc Basin up
until your height value of the plateau
so don't Implement anything here just
leave it blank
and for the wit here you say the
suggested range is infinity and that's
because this doesn't this back Arc
region basically doesn't stop it just
keeps tapering off until the next
feature is met be it a coastline or
another mountain range
Etc and just like we're tapering here we
are going to leave this blank because of
this Infinity side okay and then we will
repeat for each of the features so let's
do this one over here so again the
workflow is check its history run the
numbers input numbers into illustrator
so we'll check this Fella's history so
let's go to the oldest piece of the
puzzle here which would be this gray one
the closer is to White the older it is
form that one two eighty so let's go
back to there
oh actually it must be something older
going on here so this range form starts
to form here so that's 1 300. we have
here Andean and this is pretty thick
here so let's call that laramide
property as a result of this plate
boundary getting subducted under this
continent so we have laramide here
still Andean
Laramie continues yeah so as this goes
along it'll create laramite so we'll get
a laramide here
and then we'll finish into our modern
world with another light mode so we'll
have like three laramide stages
here okay so this this can get a little
bit complicated three laramide stages
the oldest laramides are here
middle-aged laramides new laramide but
along their Edge they will maintain an
andean-like boundary because that's
active so the Hinterlands are kind of
inactive the subduction zone that
created them has long since traveled
away but the margin is still active so
because we have inactive ranges we need
to deal with this section of the
calculator here so we start active
mountain ranges will start by putting in
laramide the picture updates laramides
are basically Andino rajni but with a
big Plateau scaling Factor obviously has
to remain the same one scaling factor
for everything on your world we repeat
by putting in Heights and widths and
this is that we're putting in the
initial Heights and widths of our
features so for example in our first
stage of orogeny here what's Happening
Here we're importing the data for this
point in time when they were young when
they were active all very
self-explanatory sold time-lapse through
this
oh and I just measured in G plates
roughly how thick this is to get a guide
so it's about 388
so I'm gonna say maybe the wish of this
plateaus about 300 including a bit of
tapering Etc
okay the only thing to point out here
that in the laramoid section you're
asked or the suggested height range is
taper to peak of X so the high two input
here is this peak here so you have a
four Arc base and height I select zero
this will taper gradually up to a
distinct Peak here
import that Peak here then we have the
plateau that's this height and then we
have this like second line of Peaks
going on here taper from peak of X
select the value from X and that will
taper away until we get to the back Arc
etc etc right so those are the initial
conditions how things were 150 million
years ago because 1 300 my world my
modern world's up one one five zero
so it's 150 million years ago so we
popped down to our inactive mountain
range section we are asked to select an
erosion rate and an age so that's the
age of your mountain chain I noticed
this is one five zero and we need to
import an erosion rate the rate you put
in here should be between four and five
meters per million years I'll say 4.6
for argument's sake now I'm pulling
those numbers from a paper understanding
Earth's rolling surface with 10
beryllium in which there is this cool
chart if I can find back here we are
that gives you the erosion rates of
various outcroppings read mountains here
the median values I think are the most
illustrative here and the ones that I've
been using on a global scale about 5
meters per million years in terms of
mountains eroding but notice that
there's also a bunch of subdivisions
given here interestingly we have here
like division by climate zone arid
called polar tempered tropical it's not
made explicit but I feel like these are
the five coping climate zones except
what should be Continental is labeled
cold I'm not 100 sure but either way it
gives erosion rates for each of these
three seven one sixteen and five
respectively the problem with this in
particular say the polar region is that
the paper pulls data from Antarctica
with a very small set like the polar
regions there isn't actually a whole lot
of land going on in the polar regions so
necessarily there's a really small set
of data and I think this produces
somewhat odd result that temperate zone
like erosion is 16 times more effective
than in the polar zone which in and of
itself makes sense it's just the
difference is massive here or the
difference between say polar and the
coal regions mountains and cold regions
erode seven times faster than polar
regions that that seems a little bit
weird to me but either way if you're
feeling courageous and or you always
stand these numbers a little bit better
you can use these numbers they're listed
in the spreadsheet if you sole desire
you can get even more granule but I I
would try against it for the
aforementioned reasons and also because
like
consonants change zones over time like
this chap is in like the temperate zone
here but he's going to end up in the
tropics so you have to kind of account
for that and I honestly I think like
that's way too much detail even for me
so I would say just go with a global
analysis of four or five-ish like I said
I'll go with 4.6 and spreadsheet use
these values to give you the height and
width of your inactive mountain range at
the current time period so for example
150 million years ago the plateau of my
laramide here I set it to be 3000 meters
it is now
2310 meters the only wrinkle here is
that recall we said that at all points
here throughout this this continent
history there's always been an act of
margin so whilst the Hinterlands here
have been eroding away the margin here
is always Andean it's always being
uplifted so I would look at this and I
would say when it says here tapers to a
peak of 3500 I will I would say that
that Peak is maintained the Hinterlands
the plateau and the back slope Etc
they'll rule away if that makes sense I
won't do this here just to save time but
again you'd make notes of this take some
screenshots import them into illustrator
just like we did and place it next to
your Laramie range okay now for large
igneous Province again history
calculation illustrator so the large
igneous Province popped off at 1380 and
became inactive at 1370 so 1370-1150 on
my world that's 220 million years that's
about one Siberian traps and nothing
weird is happening to this I don't think
nope it's just continuing on into the
modern world now the spreadsheet does
not account for large Akins promises
largely because the date is a little bit
spotty here's what I do geologists feel
free to vehemently disagree with me and
let me know better methodology in
comments if such a thing exists so I go
to Andean and I'm going to clear all of
this data and essentially I'm just going
to model a large ignis Province as being
just the plateau portion of an Andean
orogeny so I'll go to Plateau here 610
to 3650 let's just save 3000 meters for
the sake of it I'm not gonna worry about
any of these widths because the width is
going to be given by this area oh and
actually should I do three thousand hold
on
wait a minute
wait a minute oh yeah he is a large
against Province so the bigger the
largest Province the higher I'll say it
initially was in fact I think that's one
of the largest on this world
so let's pump three five fragrance sake
okay it is 220 billion years old
the erosion rate I mean you can vary it
if you want I usually just end up
holding it stable for the entire Globe
again because I'm working on a global
average so it was at three five zero
zero it is currently then at we'll call
it two five so all I would do then is
just come in here and just write
two five
for this again the exact shape of
morphology is up to our artistic intent
next
old mountain range here actually hold on
a quick note on this chap here notice
that when we looked at the Andean
orogeny which will will be going on here
we talked about an outer Arc Ridge so
you have like a little Ridge then a
basin and then our main Ridge that's
essentially what this is this is an
outer Arch Ridge so when we are running
when we're running the numbers we'd make
sure to compute that and in fact again
you can just use G plates so s on the
keyboard I'll choose this white boy here
that's about 40 kilometers so I'll make
that my outrock Ridge Etc otherwise it's
the same process as this Andean range
here anyhow the old mountain range
history calculation illustrator so you
became inactive at 1680 that's 530
million years ago almost certainly
ground down flat but let's check it out
so that mountain range began life here
so we have this like small Peninsula
looking thing there's going to be an
island arc rage happening here that will
collide with that to form this this
shape here so island arc versus
continent we'll call it wouldn't call
that Himalayan I'd call that URL so we
go back into spreadsheet Ural erogeny
picture updates new categories are given
here okay just like before we would fill
in the initial conditions for when it
was active that is 530 million years ago
something like that erosion rate 4.6
again the advocacy here is choose a
global average and just stick with it
age 530 and we'll see that we have zeros
all across the board in terms of height
the mountain range is so old it's been
ground down to nothing now here's the
thing right that is either really
interesting or really boring depending
on your persuasion like there's gonna be
really cool rajini going on along here
like the topographies could be really
detailed and we're gonna have a thin
strip of topography here and that's it
you might look at that and go that's
cool contrast I like I like that sort of
aesthetic or we could find a way of
having that mountain not be completely
gone and having more complex origin here
as well and the way we accomplish this
by saying that just some uplift occurs
or broader isostatic rebound occurs the
idea here is that like a mountain is
built up in this case a Euro mountain
mountains lots of mass very heavy that
causes the crossed kind of sink but as
the mountain becomes in inactive when
it's not being continuously maintained
it'll erode away the mass will decrease
the weight will decrease so the crust
will kind of like spring back up the net
effect of it grows the oversimplifying
everything here is that the kind of
tougher roots of the mountain range can
poke back out above the surrounding
landscape so if we wanted to do that
here I would just make a note of that
we'll say that this mountain range
should be zero but we'll do some we'll
do some uplift and again just like with
the large igneous Province the exact
morphologies can be really messy so it's
up to our artistic interpretation which
bits get uplifted like maybe up here
where it's at its widest it might have
been at its heaviest so the rebound
could have been the most so we might
have some very small Peaks
sticking up to here and when I say small
I mean very small this isn't like
thousands of meters sort of jazz thank
you hundred maybe tops okay and that is
basically how to go around planning now
do you need to do any of this absolutely
not you can totally just draw topography
based on gut feeling and if I'm gonna be
frank with you that's kind of what I did
when I produced the map that I showed at
the start of the video I was working
with a beta version of the calculator
that wasn't as detailed so a lot of what
I was doing was just based on good feel
okay so with all the data they are
garnered it's time to put in the actual
topography the way you do this is you
hit I on the keyboard you go up to your
color ramp you select a color I usually
start with either the second color up or
the highest one given the data I've just
got the idea being that like we already
have a base color that's the map so I'll
choose a second layer up here that is
our 100 to 200 height color and then I'm
going to zoom in on the map ensure that
my color ramp my Glides and my base
layer are locked so I don't draw on them
and now make sure that your top hole
layer is highlighted then hit n on the
keyboard pop over to the side here
double click the pencil menu
set the Fidelity to Accurate fill in new
pencil Strokes hit OK and then it is
simply a case of just drawing shapes
hello everyone future Edgar here past
Edgar he's up to his old Shenanigans
again he neglected to inform you that
you don't want to be doing this sort of
work with a mouse stylus on a tablet
great drawing tablet wonderful Mouse no
good it is theoretically possible but
you're just going to give yourself WAP
and RSI and it's going to be zero crack
trust me I used to use a mouse please
don't be like me so let's come along
here I know that this large igneous
province is going to be one big Plateau
I'm just gonna come along here Trace
along Coast a little bit
something like that you don't need to be
too accurate in fact I'm not being very
accurate here because it's just
demonstration purposes you'll see a time
lapse of what I actually did in a few
minutes something like this maybe put in
some shapes like that boom and then you
take off the guides you can see what the
layer actually looks like layer one done
now let's imagine we want a kind of
sheer Cliff sort of thing going on along
this Coastline for no reason then I just
want to demonstrate a point here this
can be remarkably hard to do I'll hit
command 0 on the keyboard to zoom out I
on the keyboard for the eyedropper tool
I'm going to pop up to my next layer up
here
click it then back to n and then we'll
Zoom back in now if I want to create a
kind of like rapidly ascending
a bit of topography here I have to zoom
right in and I have to like really
carefully draw along here and be very
careful not to go outside the lines it
could be a bit of a nightmare so what
you can do to speed this process up a
little bit is you can hit V on the
keyboard select the bottom layer command
C to copy it and then command F to paste
it in place it's got to be command F if
you do command V it just pastes to the
center of your viewport all right so now
we have two copies of that we'll go
command alt zoom out I will eye dropper
to the next elevation up then we'll Zoom
back in right click on it go to make
compound path
and then go to object path
offset path and what this does is it
takes the path and just like Steps it
back it shrinks it basically so we could
do something like negative 0.5 you can
mess around with the miter limit here
I'd keep this as round and then go okay
all right and now if we select this and
we get rid of our initial compound path
we now have some really tight topic over
here now that looks a little bit kind of
um artificial like it's a perfect copy
so I'm going to select this I'm going to
go to effect
distort and transform
roughen and don't do that that is crazy
uh go to Absolute select absolute I'll
drop the size and detail right down to
zero and then just increase these slowly
so if I do size like that oh I got a
smooth excellent
uh level of detail
I'll make sure your preview ticked as
well so you can see what's going on
so yeah I keep that fairly low
just something like that not 0.3 pixels
and go okay and you see that kind of
breaks it up a little bit and then we'd
repeat the same process again copying
etc etc each time roughing and then you
get a kind of really unpredictable
um sort of Cliff face thing now
obviously at the back or not obviously
maybe at the back we don't want it to
have this really tight we wanted to tape
a little bit here's another technique
you can use so n on the keyboard for
your pencil and let's say we want to we
want to just get rid of all of this here
and redesign it ourselves
so we can just come in here draw a line
all the way across and say true here
covering the area that we want to get
rid of
be on the keyboard select what we've
just drawn then select the thing you
want to modify
holding shift to click bolts or both are
selected go to window
Pathfinder and then go minus front
and that cuts away the layer that was on
top the front layer alternatively and
this is nearly easier go to shift M and
then hold alt until you see that minus
symbol on your cursor and then click and
drag through the bits you want to get
rid of like that all right so that's
caught away and now I'm going to hit
enter my keyboard get rid of my guides
layer hit I to select that topography
and then I'm going to come in here and
redraw this part here so it doesn't so
neatly hug this area
okay and at some point your hand is
going to get sore so I usually draw in
small chunks like that move my viewport
Begin Again
small chunks
like that I find a bit messy to have all
these chunks lying around the place so
I'm going to select one of those chunks
and I'm going to go to select same fill
color it selects everything at that
elevation level and then open Pathfinder
again I'm going to now click unite and
that will join them all into one nice
neat layer alternatively you can go
shift M and then simply click and drag
through all the parts you want to unite
boom and repeat this process until you
get to your desired elevation level as
confirmed by the spreadsheet now before
I run the time-lapse and end the video I
will do two more quick things on kind of
like the aesthetic side of things or the
making this look good again God is very
subjective I'm sure lots of people hate
my maps
um but the things I want to talk about
are how to effectively draw mountain
valleys and weaponizing falls and Trust
belts to make things look organic so
let's start with the mountain bodies
let's say you're in the mountains and
you'd like to make realistic looking
mountains in this sort of topographic
style let's choose let's go up here
let's choose a peak color let's say that
for argument's sake oh I on the keyboard
click it n for the pen tool and this is
gonna be rough and ready but it'll
hopefully it'll demonstrate the
principle let's imagine we have a line
of mountain peaks
something like that
okay
so if you will
for the draw in the standard kind of
fantasy map mountains
something that looks like that right now
if you imagine the way Water Works water
will run off either side of this
Ridgeline so you'd have like say a
stream running down this way but we got
a peak here so that means water will
also run off into the stream like so I'm
sure you're aware of this your Rivers
will in fact look like Rivers okay so
you have something like that and then
you have the same thing in the next
Valley over
and the important thing here is it's
going to be a ridge line along here as
well
etc etc all the way up so let me go eye
on the keyboard select my next elevation
down and on the keyboard and just to
make things easy I'm going to go down to
here or you can hit shift d to switch
drawing modes and I'm going to go draw
behind so that just places my drawing
underneath the already established
artwork as opposed to the um default
thing where it's placed on top of the
artwork makes sense here because we're
working from the top down so I'm going
to come in here and I'm just going to
first of all I'm going to surround the
peak
uh wish this tapering off elevation
thing let's say something like this
there we go so we'll have some sort of
value here that means on either side
we'll get Peak so I'm just going to draw
in a peak line here something like that
all right we got another line of Peaks
like here
again you can be a little bit neater
than I'm being with a line of Peaks
along here
along here
something like that okay so again
imagine the water is running off here
and I'll also be running down
from these Peak lines as well and that
means then that this is a river valley
which means that on either side there's
more Peaks so you could have something
like this got a peak line down here
etc etc again you can be a little bit
neater but notice the pattern that's
evolving here
and then as you proceed down through the
topographic levels you're going to
eventually make your way out of the
mountains and you'll find that like just
naturally you're going to want to start
drawing things a bit smoother so you
have like jaggery mountains and then
smoother kind of basins
etc etc all the ways to Coast so this
sort of
tree shape
is common and extremely useful to make
things look organic and the other one is
fold and Trust belts in fact I think the
best way to describe this is just to
show you so if we go back to the map
here and I should also note that this
map is far from done you'll see Picard
this continent here he's Only Just Begun
him whereas things like this are
complete so this will be a work in
progress I'll continually update it and
upload new images to the website for
those who are interested in keeping
track and also changing the commit
there's bits here like this Rift Valley
I don't like in particular I need to do
something different with the northern
sections here uh we'll top of that in a
second anyway fold and Trust belts if we
have a look down here
you'll see that we have this shape here
so I started by drawing just this Blobby
Plateau shape and then it felt a bit
kind of like well Blobby and Plateau
like
so I came off fish but just with just
little
Ridge lines like this
okay and that helped kind of blend the
plateau into the surrounding and I think
makes a very
organic looking shape and all it is is
just a bunch of lines just coming off a
blob and also if at all possible make
these like s-shaped curves that looks
pretty nice like you can see here these
chaps here they're following
particularly this chapter is following
like a nice s shape line that looks very
organic whereas if you have something
that's just like
it's a lot less organic not saying it
can't happen but it doesn't sell the
effect that this is like an organic
thing whereas if you come in here with
nice s-shape curve
it can really kind of
sell things I would be careful in
general with these though because these
occur in certain places so they commonly
form in the four lens adjacent to Major
Origins as deformation propagates
outwards
and we look on Google Maps we can see
these things happening here in Andes if
you have a look at here you can see
these like sinewy ridges occurring the
appellations is another good example of
this in fact I nearly argue better
example of this you have these sinui
ridges occurring here and they just make
well at least in my opinion they make
things feel really nice and organic and
if not nice and organic aesthetically
pleasing at least to me like I really
dig what I did here I think this looks
really cool may not be geologically
massively accurate but I don't care I
just think it looks really nice okay
that I think is that I am going to start
playing the time lapse now and while
it's playing I'm just going to go
through a quick summation
so first things first in G plates export
out a map with all the information on it
that you need to create topography both
for your land and your oceans
set up a color ramp or I should have
mentioned this earlier just steal a
color ramp from Wikipedia Wikipedia has
a great section of color ramps
you can be fancy and use a blend tool
like we talked about or you can
literally just create swatches once
you've got a ramp set up determine your
highest elevation using the world Smith
and use that to figure out the rough
elevation levels of your color Ram
more detail at the lower elevations less
detail at the upper elevations look at
other Maps topographic maps and atlases
to study how they do things and get a
Vibe check in terms of creating good
color ramps then use the world Smith to
calculate Heights and widths for your
active and inactive mountain ranges the
active mountain ranges are those that
are currently well tectonically active
inactive mountain ranges are mountain
ranges that were tectonically active but
no longer are and as such are rolling
down paying attention to the geological
history of your planet come up with
Heights and widths for each of the
ranges you're working with I model large
against provinces as Andean plateaus I
could be wrong someone let me know old
mountain ranges that have ground down to
zero for more interesting topography
invoke uplift and have them rise up a
little bit
when it comes to drawing you can use
offset path and roughen effect to speed
things up a little bit mountainous
valleys have a particular shape check
out topographic maps and try to emulate
that fold and Trust belts occur next to
major aerogenic events plus some others
in fact go check out World building past
as posed on it because again best World
building blog on the internet weaponized
fold and Trust belts to make more
organic locking shapes and I guess most
of all it's just like practice and look
up maps that's the main thing just keep
looking at Maps Okay that is land
topography done then I'm going to work
on the southern content Picard and get
that guy finalized and then we're going
to talk ocean topography all right
that's it I had a blast I hope you
enjoyed folks thanks a million for
watching subscribing patronizing all
that good stuff y'all are beautiful
beautiful beautiful nerds until next
time
Edgar house
foreign
foreign