# World Map: Sea Topography - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 26

good morning interweb Royal Brothers log
26 today we are going to talk oceans but
first we have a rather sizeable amount
of follow-up to do so point one the
poll from the last video was a total
right off recall I asked you all whether
or not you wanted to see a c topography
video
put it in a comment and I said if you're
a yay hit the like button if you're an a
hit the dislike button now I naively
taught that much like with the dislikes
on videos YouTube would surface that
information to me in YouTube Studio like
on the back end turns out that's totally
not a thing YouTube will not display
anywhere dislikes on comments nor can I
find an extension that will do that so
functionally the whole poll was a
write-off so to the 620 odd people who
voted who I know voted I'm really sorry
what we'll do going forward and in
hindsight what I should have done was
just put up a poll in the community tab
I'm going to work on the Assumption
that's a thing one can do so yeah I'm
really sorry but but all is not lost I
want you to comment try to get a sort of
vibe check from everyone and it seemed
to me that people were like yeah we'd go
for a c topography video but like you
know this isn't where all the action is
going to happen so like make a chores do
a sort of highlight thing hit the main
points quick demonstration that sort of
thing so that's what I'm going to do
stupid YouTube poll
disaster Point number two lots of people
left helpful tips about blender in
comments thank you very much if I'm be
honest though a lot of it went straight
over my head because I just do not know
how to use blender very well so if you
think there's a way I could streamline
my blender usage and or you can think of
fun other things to do in blender with
respect to this map will you please
email me I'll leave my email in the
description or you can find it on the
about page of the YouTube channel email
me a sort of idiot proof explain like
I'm five bullet pointed tutorial on how
to get the thing done that you want me
to do treat me like an absolute idiot
because I know absolutely nothing about
blender 100 of what I know is contained
in the previous video and to demonstrate
this I tried to put into effect some of
the things people were saying and I came
up with this where I took the
topographic map I made it grayscale and
then made a displacement map from it to
get this kind of like exaggerated relief
thing which I think looks really cool
but I have no way of diagnosing the
issues here or fixing the issues like I
don't know what this tearing is about
and how to get rid of it I don't know
how to make the land look I know I guess
better cleaner like I'd like each of
these layers to kind of like staircase
off their clean divides with each of
these layers but they're so
not
and that kind of bugs me I don't know
how to deal with with this weirdness up
the top of the pole here or there's a
seam and I can't deal with that there's
a bunch of things that I think people in
comments were like I'll totally get it I
won't I'm an idiot please email me and
uh I I would love to learn so that's
Point number two uh Point number three
the blending not not this blending but
like topographic blending so the state
of play was that this at the end of the
last video and I had said that I was
unhappy with these planes these vast
flat planes which in and of themselves
aren't a problem the issue was their
elevation zero to 100 meters is a bit
weird in that if there is a moderate
amount of sea level rise for example
like esri this continent here with just
like a third of it would be gone
immediately and that's not something we
see on Earth so I had said that I'd like
to blend out the mountain range a little
bit more so I took this the before and I
turned it into this the after before
after
before
after John R still looks a bit pants in
my opinion but I think um esri degra and
Picard look baller I won't dwell on too
much of what I was doing here but
functionally I was kind of thinking
about it in two ways one it needs to
look pretty at least to my eyes that's
kind of the main thing I was after it
was an Aesthetics thing but two I was
trying to think in terms of like
deposition and or erosion and deposition
so the idea is that a bunch of material
will get eroded from these mountains and
it would like fall down the mountain and
gather in this Basin so I tried to like
taper out the Basin to the shore same
thing over here
same thing here
Etc that's kind of my thought process
but really is just more the same draw
squiggly lines so is that follow-up done
I think that's follow-up done oh my God
follow up done let's talk oceans
specifically let's figure out how to
turn this gray void into something more
like this so the first thing I did was
to try and figure out the depth of my
ocean now in comments people were kind
of stoked about calculating the depth of
the ocean I I'm Gonna Let You down here
I don't do that I basically just assumed
that my oceans are always exactly like
Earth plus or minus a little bit why
because like ocean depth or sea level
rise or fall is extremely hard to
compute you can see here you just need
all these variables and you have to
equate them all together it's just
really complicated and like in terms of
World building just stuff that is too
cumbersome to try and figure out like
how much does the salinity of the the uh
the Water cut the sea water contribute
to relative sea level rise or fall or
how much is the Heat of the water
contribute to sea level rise or fall
these are so esoteric it's not really
worth trying to crunch numbers on it so
I go into G plates and I look at roughly
say the last 50 million years of my
world so that's about maybe here and I
try and keep an eye out for um
collisional events major collisional
events and major rifting events so I can
see here that Picard is going to form so
we got a collisional event occurring
here
and then after that Collision of event
concludes
basically immediately after a rifting
event opens up here that will eventually
split gen Iron II and then we get into
our modern world basic rule of thumb
here is that if there's a major
collisional event we expect the sea
levels to fall if there's a major
rifting event we'd expect them to rise
and if there's like neither really any
great collisional or rifting event I
usually just assume it's exactly like
Earth so here we had again we had this
collisional event down here with Jenner
which caused sea levels to fall and then
we have this major rifting event that's
breaking apart sorry not this pick this
is Picard sorry this is Jenner we have
this major rifting event that is going
to pull apart janner and that will cause
sea level to rise so I figured a fall
plus a rise cancel itself out my oceans
are functionally just exactly like earth
that is to say on average they're about
4.5
kilometers deep that's the average depth
of the Abyssal plane now maybe on your
world there is cause to have the oceans
rise or fall and the natural question to
ask is how much should they rise or fall
by and for that again I don't do any
computation because it's really
complicated too complicated for what
it's worth I just look at the sea level
change over time this is a great chart
from Wikipedia links in the description
it's about half a billion years of a sea
level change here and we'll see that it
really doesn't vary by a whole lot so if
there's major rifting I would go plus
150 200 250 something like that maybe
major Collision I would call minus 50
minus 100 something like that very small
variance away from from Modern Day art
but enough to introduce some variability
based on the sort of um Geographic
reality of Your World okay so that's sea
level established now next what I would
Advocate doing but something I
completely forgot to do when I was
making my uh C Topography is I would
again go into G plates and I would click
on the ocean crossed layer that is color
coded
for age quick recap and follows the
color of the rainbow from Red truth pink
in order red being the youngest crust
pink being the oldest crust in general
in general the young girl across the
higher upper is the older across the
lower down it is so for example here we
have a mid-ocean ridge here we it's
pushing up a mountain chain so we'd
expect elevated crust here or elevated
sea floor here and as we go away from
the ridge the cross gets older and older
so we'd expect to take for it to taper
down into our continents same thing here
and same thing over here the more
towards the blues and violets it goes
the lower the deeper the ocean again in
general because if you notice Here Pink
think of the older section of ocean
crust on my world but you'll note that
it occurs here in this sea in Jannah
occur occurs here in esri and down here
in Picard all three of these instances
are functionally enclosed spaces so you
can see here that this section here it's
basically like to see if Japan it's
functionally just cut off from the open
ocean so therefore I'd expect the little
deposition to occur and that would kind
of like raise up the levels there and it
did the same thing here because again
it's kind of functionally cut off
there's like a little narrow little
Inlet here and the same thing over here
so despite these areas of crust being
the oldest their depth is elevated due
to deposition so red young crust depth
quite High
towards the virus old crossed depth
quite low in enclosed spaces you can
violate that sort of binary and also
look at Earth that's a big thing about
gauging depth just look at what Earth's
doing so with all that done that's kind
of like step one and two I guess step
three is to assign some hard numbers and
make a color ramp and that's what I did
here this is a standard sort of
elevation spread for Earth's oceans
literally I lifted this from a reference
Atlas the times atlas of the world here
is the height in meters here is some
kind of like indicative structures that
are exemplars of this step you'll see
what I mean by this in a second it's
just a way of me orientating myself not
going to dwell too much on this for the
moment but the one thing I will point
out is you might think it's a bit odd
that our first elevation step is between
0 and 200 meters and then the next one
is from 200 to 2000 meters surely we're
losing an awful lot of detail there and
we'd want more elevations sort of
counterintuitively you really don't
because Earth's ocean and by extension
and consume most oceans functionally has
two levels it has a shelf level the
continental shelf level which on Earth
has an average of about like 120 meters
is a decent-ish sort of figure for it
and it has an Abyssal play in that which
is about four and a half thousand meters
on average so all other elevations has a
sort of percentage of the surface area
of the oceans
don't really account for too much so the
grossly oversimplify things you can kind
of think of Earth's oceans as being like
this where you have a shelf layer and
then you have like an Abyssal plane
layer and then this section here all
this elevation spread basically accounts
for almost nothing hence why you'll find
in Atlas is this sort of like kind of
weird
um elevation spread and conversely on
the other side you probably heard that
the Mariana Trench is about 10K uh deep
10 kilometers deep we're only going as
far as 6 000 here because between 6 and
10 basically none of the ocean is at
that depth it's literally all just
contained within trenches no need to
have detail there so I would recommend
following this spread plus or minus a
bit depending on what your uh planet is
doing or the rifting and collisions Etc
okay and finally before we analyze the
map let's talk some features and where
they are what to do with them Etc
basically where did middles and ridges
go where the trenches go what did it
look like what to do with hot spots
largely these provinces Etc so mid-ocean
ridges shock horror occur at divergent
boundaries example the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge they're basically thin-ish
underwater Mountain chains that have a
sort of Valley at their Crest and they
gently taper down to the Abyssal plane
pick up an atlas look at how the
mid-ocean ridge is marked in in this
style trenches Shakara like the Mariana
Trench occur at convergent boundaries at
subduction zones functioning their
underwater Cliffs made by the plate
being subducted the kind of key thing
for me to understand is how wide they
are so on Earth they're between about 50
and 100 kilometers in width that's a
useful stat to know for penciling them
in in Annapolis or in an atlas style
world map hotspots one of the things
that used to trip me up the whole time
was how deep should my hotspots or
specifically the trail of seamounts left
in the wake of a hot spot how deep
should they be my rule of thumb here is
that between 0 and 80 million years old
if the sea mounts are between 0 and 80
million years old they should be greater
than 2 000 meters their depth should be
greater than 2000 if they're older than
that they transition down and eventually
merge with the Abyssal plane and I am
pulling those figures here from the
Meiji sea mount named after the Meiji
emperor of Japan this here is this is
Hawaii and this whole structure here is
called the Hawaii Emperor chain
it's a really long chain of islands and
sea mounts Etc the Meiji sea mount
occurs somewhere up the north here oh
and I should state where Hawaii is
that's where the hot spot is that's
where young Crystal material is being
formed up for the major sea mount is
that that is extremely old it is 82
million years old and we'll see even at
that age its depth is 2 000 meters so
I'm using that as my kind of midpoint
younger than 80 million years it is
going to be gradually increased from
2000 older than 80 million years it's
going to gradually the sea mounts are
going to gradually decrease from 2000
and working under that framework it's
per yielded kind of decent looking
results for me so I'm happy with that
and finally large against provinces
recall in the G plates portion I said
something effective are we needn't
bother marking enlarging these provinces
in our oceans large against provinces
puff off about I think I said every 30
ish million years but because there's so
much more ocean that land most of the
time they're going to be in um in the
and because the action isn't occurring
in the ocean we just don't care I'm
gonna walk that back I think next time
around I'm going to Market enlarging his
provinces in the ocean just because they
provide sort of more intriguing uh
topography on the sea floor so what I
did was uh in lieu of that I just placed
random large of these provinces here and
there just when I felt the sea floor was
getting a bit Barren season two will do
it in a more rigorous way in g-blades
the larger English provinces the
underwater largely provinces essentially
their like elevation wise like mirrors
and ridges except instead of being a
ridge their shocker like a plateau and
I'm thinking here like the krugeron uh
come back to me where's it gone here we
go like around the Crooked krugelen
kergelen Islands here like this sort of
thing uh as far as I know this is a
large against Province and it just adds
a nice bit of detail to the sea floor
and all of these little regions here we
could justify them as being kind of
large these provinces there's another
one up in here Etc more variety than
just hot spots and mid-autian ridges so
that's the rundown they're all pretty
simple again not much going on with
seafloor so uh let us now do some
analysis of our map to see these things
in action so first layer here this is
again between zero and 200 meters this
function is just going to be our Shelf
layer everything that's marked as
continental shelf that is Continental
cross that is submerged will go in this
layer super easy in fact I I had the
Continental cross marked or had the
continental shelf marked in g-blade so I
just basically traced it layer number
two this is for depths between 200 and 2
000 meters below sea level the primary
sort of thing that happens at this
elevation is that we just transition
away from the continental shelf that's
it I've also added in areas here along
my mid-ocean ridges more elevated areas
here again for a bit of interest I'm
thinking this is like the Azores
basically all of these regions are like
these elevator regions like like this on
our Ridge and note our young hot spots
younger than 80 million years are
beginning to get marked in at this
elevation range or rather not hot spots
young underwater sea mounts are
beginning to get marked in at this
elevation range layer number three this
is the two thousand to three thousand
meter range the main thing that happens
at this depth is that we see the uh like
I guess the tops of the mid-ocean ridges
um occur at this this point basic stick
here was the younger the ridge the less
of it was so recall that John R is just
being spit in half so I I penciled in
like a really faint looking Ridge here
whereas we have more robust looking
ridges along here and of course
obviously at each point you're
transitioning away from the previous
Point all right and then we have layer
number four this is 3002 four thousand
meters again it functions away from oh
sorry I forgot there's larger things
problems up here look how cool adds a
bit of Interest
this layer is at three to four thousand
meters below sea level this functions
again like a transition away from what
you already got and notably a transition
away from the mid-ocean ridge basically
or mid-ocean ridges also note that I'm
just throwing in again these random I
guess we could call them urging's
provinces or just I rather I think I
just called them anomalies at this stage
just to introduce a little bit of
Interest pepper little dots here and
there again just to make it uh feel a
little bit more I guess natural layer
number five this is uh four thousand to
five thousand meters below sea level
this is the open ocean layer so this is
kind of where the average Abyssal plane
depth would fall so you want to make
most of your oceans this layer basically
and that's what I did here I filled
basically everything in the only thing
that remained was I carved out areas
here that would act as like ocean basins
I did that functionally at random
because I wasn't looking at my ocean uh
age map like an idiot but you would do
this based on orphanage so for example
here this is like quite an old section
here going on here so maybe it would be
totally justified having a a base and
occur along here for example please
reference don't be me please please
reference your your age map that would
be really helpful I am an idiot uh do
what I say I don't want to do
uh so that is that one then the
penultimate one is
um this is layer is between five
thousand and six thousand meters below
sea level this is our ocean deep so all
these basins that we carved in I'm
predominantly filling all of them in at
this level and I'm leaving a few little
spots here for just like extra deep
basins and they'll get covered in the
final layer which is six thousand meters
plus they are filled in but
predominantly what goes on with this
layer is the filling in of trenches so
we see here if we take off our ultimate
layer there is nothing put in there and
if we turn it on that is marked in there
all right and that is basically that
like I'm not glossing over a bunch of
information here there isn't really that
much two oceans particularly because for
most people they're very much a
background thing they're not the area of
most important you basically set
yourself an average depth you look at
the age across the gauge what parts of
the ocean or default Parts aren't set up
a color ramp and elevations basically
pull from Earth plus or minus a few
hundred meters and then basically just
get drawing uh but they're in that last
one is where the time really goes like
it takes a long time to draw this and in
fact actually I can tell you how long
it's going to take hold on be right back
okay here we go while I was drawing the
oceans in I was listening to Dan
Carlin's Hardcore History Supernova in
the east Great series for anyone who
enjoys military history uh I listen to
four and a half episodes it took me four
and a half episodes to make the oceans
so what's that that's a 4.5 plus 4 is
8.5 plus 5 is 13.5 plus 4 is 17.5 plus
3.5 is 21 if my math is correct we'll
say plus another hour or two
um in case I ever paused it for a bit to
think
Etc so a bit between 21 and 24 hours
were dedicated to to to this uh which
Jesus when I say that that's really
that's a long time
but here we are folks my my track down
Madness it continues
um right oceans done uh what are we
gonna do next time oh I think what we're
gonna do next time now that we have our
oceans done I think we should look a
tight let's figure out what our tides
are doing
um what areas get normal Tides what
areas get weird Tides while Aries don't
get Tides
Etc
um let's do that and then we'll talk
climate all right I hope you enjoyed
folks thank you so much for watching on
screen now is some sort of really nice
animation of this world I hope you enjoy
that too and yeah until next time
eight giraffes