# Ocean Depth Calculator - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 27

good morning interweb worlds log 27
although I guess it's probably like a
26.5 this is a sort of addendum to the
previous video on um seaf Flor
topography recall that I had said ocean
depth is extremely hard to compute and
also recall that I had said that ocean
depth varies as a function of oceanic
crossed age so the older the ocean
crossed the deeper the ocean the younger
to cross the more shallow the ocean and
it like literally only just dawned me in
editing the previous video to think to
myself wait a minute is there some sort
of like formula that describes that
relationship cuz I've never tried to
compute ocean depth coming at it from
the angle of oceanic cross age so to
Wikipedia I went and I stumbled across C
floor depth versus age very aptly titled
page the excitement in the room was now
pal
did they have a bunch of mats listed
turns out they did indeed have a bunch
of mats listed that describes this
relationship between ocean across age
and see floor depth I went to the
citations looked at the papers they had
cited and then graphed the models that
they had namely this chap here for young
crust and this chap here for old crust
and the graphs turned out to look like
this and what you're looking at here is
the x-axis is time in millions of years
the Y AIS is C SE floor depth in meters
the red curve here is what the model
predicts in the papers it basically
means the sea Flor the blue line here
lying on the x-axis just to make things
a little B clearer is sea level so what
this says is that new crust crust that
is 0 million years old it is currently
being created necessarily then it exists
exclusively at mid ocean ridges mid
ocean ridges are the birthplace of new
oceanic crust mid ocean ridges are like
underwater Mountain chains therefore
that crust is more elevated than the
surrounding ocean floor and in this
instance cross that is 0 million years
old will be about 2,500 M below sea
level and we compare that to say cross
that is 50 million years old it would be
just shy of 5,000 M below sea level
because as the crust ages it subsides
and the cool thing is and something that
I hadn't appreciated this subsistance
ASM totically approaches about 6,400 M
it doesn't just keep subsiding and sub
iding and subsiding it kind of levels
out at about 6,400 M which is cool so
that looked neat the mats didn't look
too hard so I went and popped it into
the worldsmith so that means there is a
new version of the worldsmith out
version 5.0 if you go to the tectonics
page and scroll down you'll find the new
section here called oceans ocean depth
calculator all you got to do to use it
is input the average height of your mid
ocean ridge important to note here that
2,600 for instance in this case means
2,600 M below sea level essentially what
you're telling the calculator is what is
my initial height and then it computes
the rest of the curve and then it autop
populates this big old table here with
the cross doal age in millions of years
and the ocean depth and if you've been
following along with the whole G plates
thing and you've done your own G plates
project this is now super useful
information to know so for example if we
pop back into gep plates and turn on our
ocean crust layer we know that any red
sections of ocean like this one for
example indicate ocean crust that is
between 0 million years old i. cross at
the mid ocean ridge and 50 million years
old so if we assume these values for a
second we know that at the mid ocean
ridge the crust is 2,600 M deep as in
the ocean depth is 2,600 M and at 50
million years it's 5,000 m 2,600 along
here 5,000 along here the orange section
is between 50 and 100 million years the
yellow sections are between 100 and 150
Etc each going in chunks of 50 million
years which is just awesome so that
means that we are able to calculate
ocean depth really simply given what we
know from gplates now at this point you
might be asking well what sort of
figures can we put in here in the little
note section here I said that 2,600 plus
or minus 500 is probably a decent range
I am getting this from the Encyclopedia
Britannica I know I'm quoting
encyclopedia but we're not doing science
here here we're doing War building and
they say Oceanic ridges are found in
every ocean Basin and appear to girdle
Earth the important bit The Ridges rise
from depths near 5 km to an essentially
uniform depth of about 2.6 km or 1.6
miles so what I'm going to do for this
project and future projects is just
basically assume that all mid ocean
ridges on a given Planet are
2.6k or lie at 2.6 km below sea level so
I have one set of numbers BAS basically
that I can apply to this Heap map makes
life very easy and given the variance in
size between similarly colored zones
here it won't lead to a sort of
homogeneous outcome which I think is
pretty cool and I have started doing
this so here's my world creac
placeholder name it'll change at some
stage as we left it in the last video
where I was just kind of going by feel
and eyeballing the um ocean topography
and here is what it currently looks like
still a work in progress check out I've
completed these two oceans here so this
ocean here the one between ezri and de
I've completed and the one the derra
Ocean between DEA and peard here I've
also completed so compare the difference
this was going on
fields this is going on the
mats
Fields
mats
Fields mats which I really enjoy so now
if someone comes along and says well why
is there this big ocean deep here this
massive Basin I can say well if we look
at the age of the ocean crust we'll see
here that this ocean crust is quite old
so it has subsided ocean deep Etc I am
buzzed about this I realize it's it's
like a super subtle difference like it's
not that big a deal but I love this all
future projects I'm doing this once
again I'm not going to subjugate you to
endless time lapses of me doing the
oceans I'll do it all off air and FYI
actually I do a lot of this topography
work on Patron only live stream so if
you're interested in seeing I guess more
of the process the more mundane stuff um
you should check out that but regardless
next episode a completed Oran map will
be presented and then we can move on
with the next step all right that's it
go check out the calculator I hope you
enjoy oh and one more thing before I go
to all the beautiful wonderful awesome
people who emailed me about my blender
walles y'all are just great I I can't
name drop you all cuz there's so many
emails but I am beginning to understand
things a little bit better so this is
the current state of my like false
relief little map way way better I'm now
watching I think it's blender Guru the
donut guy I'm sure everyone's aware of
the meme I'm watching his series at the
moment so I I I can figure out how to do
lighting correctly how to put in a
backdrop and then I'm going to try and
spin this Boo and going make a little
video and it'll be all class okay
addendum done as always thanks a million
for watching and thanks a million for
supporting this series it means so so
much have a great one and until next
time Ed GR