# Ocean Currents - Worldbuilder’s Log 28

good morning interweb world withs log 28
We are continuing to build out our
planet here placeholder Nam creac and in
this video we're going to start down the
road to getting our climate zones marked
in beginning that process today with
marking in our ocean currents with a
side helping of winds and sea ice thrown
in just for good measure before we start
let's just list some sources primarily
I'm going to be following World building
pasta's excellent climate building guide
now World building Pastor relies very
heavily on simulating climate which is a
thing I don't want to do here I'd like
to go for a more accessible by hand
approach so we're going to supplement
his methodology with that of fantasy
author and YouTube extraordinaire meline
James writes if you don't know who this
person is you're in for a treat she has
an absolutely excellent sort of by hand
analog world building guide highly
highly recommend also 1.3k subscrib is
Criminal given the quality of content
she puts out there so please please
please go over and show her some love
okay so now before we Mark in ocean
currents it would behoove us to
understand a little bit about how they
work so science lesson engaged so on an
earthlike Planet your ocean currents are
going to look something like this that
is assuming that your earthlike planet
spins at relatively the same rate as
Earth and in the same direction as Earth
what's being depicted here are surface
wind driven currents because they're
wind driven we need to understand how
the winds work on an earth like planet
and again assuming a similar rotation
rate and Direction the winds on your
fantasy world should look a little bit
like this albeit this is a very
idealized model at her near the equator
you're going to get an intertropical
Convergence Zone aka the itcz aka the
doldrums at about 30° north and south
you're going to get your subtropic highs
aka the horse latitudes
and at about 60° North and South you're
going to get your subpolar lows AKA The
Polar front low pressure zones are wet
high pressure zones are dry and
temperature drops off as you go poleward
so the itcz is hot and wet the horse
latitudes are warm and dry the polar
front is like cool and moist and up near
the tippy top here conditions are cold
and dry now recall that warm air rises
and cool air sinks so warmest at the
intertropical Convergence Zone warm air
rises there up to a given altitude
splits heads polewards Cooling and
eventually sinking to form the horse
latitudes and then the air blows back
along the ground to close up this Loop a
loop that we call the Hadley cell same
shtick occurs up in the Polar cell
relatively warm air rises at the polar
front up to a given altitude travels
poleward cools dries sinks and travels
back along the ground ditto for the
feral cell cell now because earthlike
planets will be spinning these surface
winds here will never just travel north
to south directly they're going to be
deflected due to the spin and the Corola
force in the tropics these surface winds
will be deflected to the West so
obviously we call them Easter which is
just really annoying but they're given
that name because they blow from the
East again same deal up in the Polar
cell you get the polar Easter Le and in
the feral cell the surface winds are
deflected to the east so again we call
them westerns because they blow from the
West once you got that grock it's pretty
easy to see how these circulation cells
in the ocean come about at her near the
equator currents flow in general to the
West because they are blown thusly by
the Easter Lees aka the trade winds they
keep on bopping along until they hit
some land at which point they split
heading poleward in both hemispheres
they continue to head poleward until
like Midway through the feral cell where
the westerlies dominate so the current
gets blown to the east until it meets
some land again splits one branch heads
pull word one branch heads equatorward
to close up this Loop known as a gy and
you'll see this pattern repeat itself
all over the place same mechanism of
play currents shown in Black here are
kind of like neutral currents they're
not transferring much heat currents
shown in red are warm currents
transferring heat from warmer latitudes
into colder latitudes and currents shown
in blue here are cold currents
transferring colder Waters into warmer
latitudes an important thing to note
about all these guers here is that they
form a logical system of like revolving
units so like nowhere on the planet does
water go into a space and not come back
out everything has to kind of like hook
up correctly which hopefully I'll be
able to demonstrate to you as we draw
them in later now finally you might be
asking well who cares do we even need to
Mark in ocean currents they can't be
that important right and the answer is
yes they are very important one they
help us determine climate zones CU they
show us how heat transfers around the
globe and Heat plays a role in climate
zone placement two they give us shipping
lanes so we have an idea how people
might move through the oceans and three
we're not going to touch on this video
but it'll come up later they'll also
help us track where good fishing areas
are where very productive areas are and
so by extension might help track where
we might put thriving civilizations so
ocean currents a step not to be skipped
over to blender we pop and let's prep
this for drawing the basics of setting
up your file here are covered in episode
25 links and usual places I'm so I'm
just going to skip to all the old
information so in addition to our base
map layer here we're going to need to
make six additional layers here's what
they name them and we're going to place
them in this order so to make a layer
shift a
search image
texture new name your layer starting
with in this case summer C ice height
and width is that of your base map in my
case that's 5,000 by 2,500 color make
sure you take the make sure you click on
the color take the alpha down to zero
and make sure Alpha is checked and then
hit okay and the save space twidle down
this little arrow
here excellent rinse and repeat and
it'll look something like this next we
need to hook these all up so we have to
go shift a search Mix Change float to
color and then this is really important
you got to do this in this precise order
starting with your base map take the
yellow node and put it into a on your
next layer down take the yellow node and
put it into B and then from that same
layer take the gray node and put it into
Factor then collapse this and put it
right right next to this layer now these
two layers are hooked up so we're going
to repeat this process shift a search
mix float color and this time we take
the output of the mix node this yellow
node here put it into a we go down to
our next layer take the yellow node put
it into B and from that same layer take
the gray node and put it into factor and
then collapse and move this beside your
new layer repeat this process for each
of the layers
like so and then take the final node of
your final layer run it into color in a
missions and you may as well just
collapse these down just to make
everything all nice and neat we're doing
all this Malarkey here purely just to
have a bunch of transparent layers upon
which we can draw and if at any time we
want to hide one of these layers make it
invisible we just go to the mixed node
beside the layer we want to make
invisible click on it hit M to turn it
off and hit M again to turn it back on
which is really hand and the final thing
if we go over to texture paint here I'm
me just zoom this F out there we go
scroll down to the bottom here be really
careful the cursor should change mine's
giant this is difficult come on where
are you click and drag up to put in like
a new workspace I guess head on over the
paint Booker tool here in the corner
click down and change this to Shader
editor just so we can have our layers is
visible here in case we want to toggle
visibility and you don't want to be you
know changing tabs to do this okay no
Globe no worries go over the top here
click beautiful oh and the reason why we
have summer and winter versions for each
of these layers is that we're going to
basically create two maps of everything
one for summer and one for winter
because conditions change over the
course of a year and tracking this will
allow us to um bring seasonal
variability into our climate mapping
also note that when I say summer and
winter here I'm talking with respect to
the northern hemisphere so summer ocean
currents means the ocean currents when
it's northern hemisphere summer and I'm
defining North as just being top of the
screen here just so we're all orientated
okay step one okay so we are going to
start this process by marking in our
itcz when it's northern hemisphere
summer so make sure you go over here to
the sidebar and have the screwdriver and
wrench tab clicked scroll down to Summer
Wind patterns and select that just to
make sure you're drawing on the correct
layer get yourself a nice big brush
strength .5 color blue because the ITC
is wet blue wet you get deal now
unfortunately for us the itcz is not a
neat Line running across the equator it
actually looks more like this red here
is what it's doing in northern
hemisphere summer blue here is what the
itcz is doing in southern hemisphere
summer now without simulating things
it's like really difficult to accurately
place this so what we're going to do is
we're going to up some guidelines some
loose guidelines based off what the
Earth is doing namely these basically
the itcc stays close is to the equator
over oceans and it moves poleward
following the land in the summer
hemisphere now my planet is a little bit
less tilted than Earth so I think my
itcz is going to lie a little bit more
equater word over oceans and a little
bit less poleward over land masses so
let's mark that in back to blender start
by marking in the rough location of the
itcz in the summer hemisphere over your
oceans something like that here's the
10° latitude mark five is about here so
I went a little bit less given my lower
axial tilt next Mark in the poleward
extremes of the itcz over your land
masses remember the more expansive the
land mass the more poleward you can go
so the itcc is basically following the
hottest parts of the planet so as you're
locating these points try to take the
morphology of the land into account so
like there's Giant mountain ranges
they're going to be quite cold so use
that to adjust where you might place
these markers again without simulation
we're relying on just intuition and the
final thing to do is just join up all
the
dots now at this point you might be
expecting me to fill in the rest of the
wind patterns like the horse latitudes
the polar fronts Etc but they're
actually not as important for filling
out ocean currents so we're going to
park those and we'll look at them in
detail in a winds video for now the itcc
is more than sufficient to get us
started with ocean currents so change
layer here to Summer ocean currents
select a black thin brush and start by
marking in your equatorial
countercurrent that is in every ocean
run a current that flows Eastward
following your doldrums or your itcc
where you hit continental shelf that
lies roughly perpendicular to the flow
of the current stop the current offshore
if you hit continental shelf that lies
at a shallow angle with respect to the
current run this equatorial
countercurrent up the coast a little bit
cool so once this current hits a
continental shelf and note I'm saying
continental shelf here specifically
we're not just referencing land masses
we're referencing the full extent of the
continental crust even if it's submerged
one it hits a substantial chunk of
continental crust this equatorial
countercurrent is going to split and
curve tightly back around go no more
than say 5 to 10° of latitude away from
your equatorial counter current now
increase your brush size keep it black
cuz these are neutral currents they're
not transferring heat across the
latitudes and from each of these
splitting points we just put down run a
Westward equatorial current until you
meet eat a chunk of continental shelf
again going no more than about 5 to 10°
away from your equatorial counter
current now switch to a red brush and
where these Westward equatorial currents
hit continental shelf run a poleward
warm current along your coasts up until
30° for now
latitude okay now it's not entirely
clear as to what might happen here so
what I'm going to do is I'm just going
to stub in a little warm current here
and we'll figure out its exact
morphology in a
bit also not when I say that these
currents flow along the coasts like they
don't hug the coast like often times
they run several hundreds of kilometers
offshore so you don't need to worry
about being too precise here and you
should buy past things like minor
Coastal Bays or Coastal Seas they don't
really come into play here so as the
warm currents enter the feral Cell
between 30 and 60° North and South the
Wester and the Corola force will come to
dominate and will send the currents back
across the ocean to the east where they
turn will be somewhere between 40 and
50° North and South in the summer
hemisphere stick closer to the upper
range in the winter hemisphere stick
closer to the lower range so like if we
extend this trap up along here this is
the summer hemisphere so I'm going
continuing on to maybe Midway through
the cell here I know he's going to go
back across the ocean and as it goes
back across it'll maintain a sort of
poleward slant to it so we'll continue
marking it in red cuz it's still kind of
to an extent transferring heat from
warmer lower latitudes to cooler higher
latitudes so he'll start moving around
here maintaining a c a poleward bent to
it so I'm going to say at the opposite
side of this ocean because it's the
Summer Side he's going to approach 50°
here which is maybe something like so
and then all I'm going to do is just
join these two up as best I
can something like that so rinse and
repeat now in this section ocean my
currents never get up to between 40 and
50 there's land in the way so we'll
simply just follow our Coastline along
stopping it on the other side of the
ocean
winter hemisphere so I'm going to say
when this chap gets the other side of
the ocean he's going to be closer to 40
so we'll say maybe here so he'll do
something
like this perhaps stopping him at this
continental shelf section here
here's tricky I said we're ignoring Bays
but that's a hell of a bay for now given
the flow here I'd imagine this would
continue across the ocean like so and
we'll see where we do something here
later so next we'll switch to a blue
color and wherever the currents we just
drew in hit a substantial section of
continental shelf they'll split again
just like before go pull word and
equatorward and close up some guers
so couple of things here number one if
you have a major current Crossing across
an ocean and there's a substantial land
mass within about 50 degrees of latitude
of it so what's that that's about 10 20
30 40 50 that's what we got here you may
peel a current off this main current
down to meet this land mass when it's
directly North or South so something
like this and it's cool obviously cuz
it's transferring colder Waters into
warmer regions but also helping to
inform us what to do with this chap so
he would very naturally just continue up
along
here closing this guy and the other
thing is yeah baz right I said we don't
worry about them at all and you might be
asking like well what goes on there are
there no ocean currents in there the
reason why we're mapping out ocean
currents is to do with heat transport
and how this heat will affect the land
and by extension the climate zones in
terms of heat transfer there's not much
going on here yeah there'll be a bunch
of currents but there'd be kind of like
more minor kind of more like edies as
opposed to these major currents so what
we say is that the bay here just
inherits the kind of heat properties of
the current that's flowing offshore so
like all of this section here will be
like a cold current Coast because
there's a major Cold current running
offshore and we don't care about the
minor currents here if that makes
sense oh and finally here when you have
these currents running kind of counter
to one another you can if you want it's
not a massive deal you can switch to
Black drop your brush size and just
indicate you know that there is in fact
water doing this so it's kind of like
there's like a I guess you could say
it's a mini G it's not really but you
can just indicate this should you wish
to do so
very good next up we're going to switch
to red because we have new splitting
points we've sent cold Waters down into
Tropics we're now going to send warm
Waters up until the poles and so we do
this by peeling off a current following
again the Shelf up until about 70 to 80°
North and South in the summer hemisphere
more
equatorward in the winter hemisphere
more poleward so something a little bit
like
this and now the Easter will begin to
dominate forcing this water back across
the ocean maintaining a poleward slant
to us so I'm going to say again that
maybe we reach land or continental shelf
here somewhat so we'll just join that up
trying to keep a forward slant
Bingo rinse and repeat
I'll drop one in here forming the guy
but I may come to regret that I'll have
to go away and think about
that okay and then we switch to Blue and
we close up our guers
and finally the poles if you have an
open ocean at the PO switch to Black and
Mark in a circumpolar current flowing
Westward and again this is a neutral
current cuz it's not really traversing
the latitudes so that's why we're
marking in black and it's not doing a
whole lot in terms of
transfer and also it's probably going to
be hidden in a second something like
that now what that will help us do is
figure out the weirdness of this ocean
here so this water is like looping
around like so it's going to be affected
by the Cel shelf here and be sent
forwards it's going to be a coal current
so it would likely do something
like this I guess now that is 40 to 50
here
which is where currents got blown
Westward which means that we'd expect
some sort I'm just sketching here I'm
not switching colors we'd expect some
sort of and it's in the summer
hemisphere so over here it's going to
get quite northernly so we'd expect some
sort
of cross ocean current there which means
we'll have a split this way and this way
so this will come back around
yada this will go up
here and this will connect up
here which is just so weird and I'm not
sure if it's correct because we have
this like tiny little dwarf guy and it's
occurring because ordinarily this guy
would continue up like so but there's
there's land in the
way I don't know if I like this part of
me part of me thinks and here's where
you kind of like break away from
patterns and begin to kind of like
Intuit stuff part of me thinks that
again we're dealing with abstraction
here so what's going to happen you know
along each of these currents like
constantly bits of water are going to be
peeling off right so if that's occurring
here you can imagine there's so much
peeling off here that there may be like
no room for this kind of current so we
would actually just get one giant
current down here and back up which
is maybe correct it's definitely not
earthlike cuz we don't have this set up
on Earth um so I I might go with that
and if there are any Professionals in
comments you can let me know if that is
completely bananas but I think the logic
is sound so this coal current extends
down here which we would not
expect but again the morf of the ocean
seems to be indicating that possibly and
then we'll switch to red to come up
along
here wow that's so
weird hm
H not sure how I feel about
that but hey ho okay that is I think
ocean currents done correct well kind of
Next Step sea ice so apologies for these
images they're they're quite Pixy but
these are the nicest I guess I could
find so sea ice sea ice can be important
because it is not continental shelf but
it does a pretty great job at blocking
ocean currents like continental shelf so
if we can figure out where the CI is
that might inform some of the morphology
of our currents and I guess vice versa
again without simulating things it's
super hard to tell where SE ice could go
cuz it it's meant to go in regions where
the sea never gets above -2° C again
sand simulation quite hard to spot so
once again we'll eyeball Earth and we'll
look for General guidelines cuz I
constructed this planet to be relatively
earthlike so I can kind of do this stuff
also my ocean up here is more akin to
the Arctic than it is the antar an
Arctic cuz there's no big continent here
so I'm just going to look at what's
going on here this is sea ice in Winter
and this is sea ice in summer broadly
speaking and from this we can draw these
General sets of guidelines basically the
bulk of the sex exists between 70 and
80° North and South in the summer closer
to 80 in the winter closer to 70 along
eastern coast so that's coasts with cold
currents you can extend the sea ice down
to about 45° North and South but really
has a thin strip along the coasts you
don't even need to mark that last bit in
because in terms of blocking ocean
currents and the like it's not going to
do a whole lot given how Coastal it is
so with those guidelines set let's see
what we can do I'm going switch over to
Summer SE ice again be pedantic about
your layers going to select the white
brush for obvious reasons we're in the
summer hemisphere here so just 80° North
which is here and up or poleward should
I say I'm just going to color in
I'm also just going to extend this down
to the coasts for no other reason than
it just kind of feels
right and if you note here there's a big
cutaway in the sea ice here I suspect
though I could be around this is because
of the Norwegian current part of the
Gulf Stream as in warm waterers coming
across here and up into here thus
limiting the spread of sea ice I think
so I'm going to mimic this here again
someone let me know if this is
completely off base so we have this warm
current here so I suspect it could maybe
eat into the sea ice a little
bit and maybe along these colder coasts
sea ice can Prevail but I'm not going to
go more than 70 so maybe something like
that and along here we have this big
kind of Trans Ocean current here and I'm
kind of thinking of this as being like
what's going on in the Antarctic like
kind of circum poolar currents that like
limit the spread of sea ice around
Antarctica so we'll say that this guy
Corrals the sea ice so it's not going to
go down any further something like that
tentatively so I'm just going to edit
the currents to show what's blocked and
what's
not okay something like that there
obviously still will be currents kind of
below the CIS I guess but we're just not
going to mark them in and let's not
forget about the other
Hemisphere okay cool so winter
hemisphere we going to go closer the 70
the literally the only bit of open ocean
well I say open ocean water we'll say in
that range between 70 and 80 is this
little chunk here so we're going to have
basically no sea ice functionally so
it's going to be all along here perhaps
that's kind of it and certainly it's
doing no current blocking so we're cool
there there okay so that is ocean
currents done at least for Northern
Hemisphere somewhere what we do now is
you would go ahead and do the exact same
thing but for when the northern
hemisphere is in Winter I won't do this
now just to save a bit of time I'll do
it off air and show you the start of
next video what I do want to talk about
now are Eno events that's NS o l Nino
Southern oscillation events hi everyone
sorry future Edgar here I decided to in
fact go ahead and Mark in all of the
winter ocean patterns here they are
little bit hard to see in 3d the
comparison between the seasons so let's
switch over to 2D here is the state of
play in northern hemisphere
summer and here it is in northern
hemisphere winter summer winter summer
winter and incidentally this weird chunk
of ocean here that we were pondering
over earlier it's definitely going to
have this Cal current going the whole
way down in winter so that could mean
that in summer where we were debating
having this little mini guy it could
mean we have like a seasonal guy that
only crops up depending on the season
which again like hella weird and I don't
think happens on a really meaningful
scale on Earth which is cool but also
you know at the same time worrying cuz
like what do you do there like I said
I'll go away and think about it we'll
figure something out anyways back to
Enzo events these occur along equatorial
oceans that are landlocked to the west
and the East and probably also either
the North or the South and these regions
will experience a sort of switch and
oscillation between different climate
extremes going from really wet to really
dry on kind of very macro cycle so not
seasonally but across many years like 3
4 5 years at a time so what I'm going to
do is try and locate where this effect
would be the strongest so first step I
usually do is look for my the widest
expanse of equatorial ocean which is
probably here but it's not incredibly
landlocked along this side I
wonder nor is that I wonder would this
be the
one so we're landlocked here we're
landlocked here we're landlocked up
above maybe this might be where the
effect is the strongest possibly even
though it's a relatively small ocean
H let's go for it for now I'm just going
to put a dot here here on either side
just to indicate to me that the dipole
is occurring here it's also called a
dipole so what will happen is during a
positive phase the currents and the
winds will kind of act as we've like
depicted here lots of warm water will be
forced over here given the directions of
the currents warm water low pressure
lots of rain so we have relative
abundance going on here and conversely
over here all the warm water has been
vacated upwelling occurs we'll talk
about it later get a bunch of cold water
cold water cold temperatures high
pressure drought so abundance drought
during a positive phase of the cycle and
then for complicated reasons I do not
want to get into this cycle can switch
where a bunch of warm water now pools
over on this side warm water low
pressure lots of rain so we get lots of
abundance here at the same time here
we'll have cold water high pressure dry
conditions drought and you see this
effect on Earth between South America
and Australia where this switch occurs
on these macro Cycles hence Enzo event
ELO Southern oscillation it's the
oscillation that occurs between South
America and Australia this is a subtle
effect it won't play a huge role in
determining climate zones but it would
play a huge role in terms of culture
obviously and just to be clear this
would affect well maybe not here but
this would affect all the oceans but
we're kind of only worried about where
the effect would be strongest which
again I leave is here if not here
probably here again I'll think about it
okay is that this video done I think
that's this video done as always thank
you so much for watching I really hope
you enjoyed stay safe and until next
time oh by the way check out World
building past and madn James wres links
in the description Ed girl