# Winds & Pressure - Worldbuilder’s Log 29

good morning interweb world buers log 29
We are continuing to flesh out our
planet here placeholder name creac we're
on the road to getting our climate zones
marked in with a topic of today's video
being prevailing winds but as always
before we crack into that we got to do
some follow-up item number one sea ice
so off air I changed the shape of the
sea ice here this is it in northern
hemisphere summer and this is it in
northern hemisphere winter southern
hemisphere winter and southern
hemisphere summer I settled on these
shapes thanks to personal correspondence
with a hydrographer acquaintance of mine
Raul if you're listening thanks a
million though that said these are not
final they may change this the sea ice
may change depending on what the winds
come out as so still very much a work in
progress Point number two this really
weird seasonal guy thing we just
discussed in the last episode thinking
on it some more I do think it's too
small to actually exist so I think this
circulation pattern in this ocean will
be present both in summer and winter so
this is it in northern hemisphere summer
and this is it in the winter still
pretty cool though because these sort of
currents just don't exist on Earth and
item number three final item is I moved
the itcz up a little bit here off camera
I had it ducking down to I think about
here but I figured it's being dragged by
the land here or it's been dragged
upwards by the land here and simmer here
so I don't think it would dip down quite
as much very minor tweak doesn't really
do much to the overall circulation it
just made me feel better okay followup
done let's talk some prevailing winds so
previously we had looked at this kind of
oversimplified model of how atmospheric
circulation would work on an earthlike
Planet real planets not like this thanks
in no ball part to land land basically
will screw up this really nice neat
pattern so we're going to need to come
up with a more kind of complex modeling
system to more accurately gauge what the
prevailing winds on our planets are
doing so let's give a quick overview as
to how this kind of more complex model
would work before we actually do it in a
second so we got our itcz already marked
from previous videos it was this kind of
like wavy line looking thing that moved
with the seasons
cool what we'll do today is we'll focus
on our high pressure zones so those are
the areas around the subtropical High
zone or the horse latitudes and up at
the poles here we'll Place some
circulation cells again the exact
location we'll discuss in a second just
giving a quick overview in and around
the subtropical High Zone
here and we'll do the same at the
poles again recall that winds blow from
areas of high pressure two areas of of
low pressure as per our simplified chart
here on the left but because planets are
spinning the winds won't blow in
straight lines rer in spirals in the
northern hemisphere they spiral in a
clockwise
Direction in the southern hemisphere
they'll spiral in an anticlockwise
direction again due to the corol as
force and then really simply all we're
going to do is expand the on these
so-called anticyclones continuing to
swirl out these winds until they come
into contact with one another and we've
covered the whole planet in Wind
patterns so something kind of like
this something like this now recall
again super important winds flow from
areas of or blow from areas of high
pressure to areas of low pressure
therefore necessarily these cells are in
conflict with one another they can't
flow into one another otherwise you get
winds going from high to high so in
those instances where these patterns
meet we're going to end up creating low
press
zones same thing in the
South and also in the mid lats where
these Cyclones bought up against one
another and that's basically that Mark
in hyper pressure zones and remember
high pressure zones tend to be pretty
dry spiral out winds from the cells
until they come into contact with one
another and when that happens a low
pressure front will be created low
pressure remember relatively wet and
although this looks shock and messy it
kind of follows the same principles as
this simplified diagram so like in the
Polar cell here winds are predominantly
going this way as they are here in the
temperate zone between 30 and 60° winds
are primly going this this way again as
they are here in the tropics promly
going this way same shtick with the
southern hemisphere it's just we're
incorporating a more kind of
naturalistic flow pattern all right
let's go put this into action so I
actually like to do a lot of this work
in 2D just because I can see the whole
planet at one time and then transfer to
3D to check for errors just a me thing
your mileage might vary so the first
thing we want to do is place our
subtropical highs that is these mid
latitude circulation cells to do that
I'm going to bring up my ocean currents
map and I'm bringing it up for northern
hemisphere summer that's the season
we're going to work on in this video and
the basic stick here is that we're going
to place a number of high pressure cells
subtropical highs in our oceans biasing
them towards cold currents cuz remember
high pressure relatively cool dry Etc in
the summer hemisphere we're going to
Center them at about 35° of L itude and
in the winter hemisphere we're going to
Center them at about 25° of latitude
this chap is a summer hemisphere here's
the Equator so that's 0 10 20 30 35 this
is my coal current here so I'm going to
put a circulation
cell here then we have 0 10 20 30 is
here so it's a bit lower than I would
like but that's fine skewed it towards
the cold current Coast so we'll drop it
in somewhere here 0 10 20 30 35 skew
towards coal current maybe somewhere
here and then 0 10 20 30 35 is in the
middle here so we'll put another
one about here okay that's the summer
winter 25° 0 10 20 25 skew towards the
cold
current 0 10 20
25
0 10 20
25 and 0 10 20 25 next to the coal
current so next we want to add High
Press zones to any winter hemisphere
large land masses the idea here is that
land will heat up and cool down more
rapidly than the oceans so if we got a
big chunk of land in winter it's going
to get very cold again cold hyper
pressure without simulations of
temperature here this can this is very
very vague so you just need to work on
intuition I'm immediately drawn to this
kind of rather substantial peninsula
here I can imagine it would get very
cold so the basic stick here will be to
place a circulation cells somewhere
roughly in the middle skew towards any
particularly cold regions so I'm just
you know intuition is telling me
possibly here somewhere there's some
cold current stuff going on here here
but also on the other side over here so
I'm thinking just bang in the middle
maybe
somewhere maybe somewhere there and
these can be further forward than your
subtropical High Zone cells now we have
high zones as mentioned previously at
the
poles but we will save these for when
we're in blender in 3D just to avoid
Distortion issues just make a mental
note something's going on here
something's going on here oh and I guess
we could Al have some sort of high here
but again I'm reluctant to include this
it's not as sizable as this area over
here it's flanked by a bunch of warm
currents there's no particularly high
mountains within this little jot of land
that would make this area more cold
relative to areas at a similar latitude
so I'm inclined to say for now nothing
here so next we're going to Mark in our
anticyclones which is the directionality
that the winds are going to spiral out
at so something like like
this gravy now let's turn off these
ocean currents we don't need them
anymore makes things a little bit
cleaner so next we're going to Mark in
our trade winds or for our tropical
eastery that is these Fellers here for
the most part actually they do kind of
stick to this simplified diagram
originating from our high pressure cells
our subtropical highs and flowing into
the itcz in a sort of Westward Direction
so I think the best way of explain this
is to literally just do it first and
then I'll I'll explain why I did the
things I did so we'll start in the
Northern Hemisphere and we will do
something like this
so the basic stick is I'm trying to keep
this kind of spiral in mind I start on
the Eastern Edge bring out a wind
pattern in accordance to spiral and then
bring it back around to meet the itcz
cuz again in Tropics the winds should be
predominantly flowing to the west and
then I do add a couple of more times
again trying to keep the
spiral in mind and also important to
note that I'm feeding them into the itzz
not the equator that's really important
and the same pattern basically holds for
each of the cells I've left gaps we'll
top out those in a second now let's do
the same for the winter hemisphere
there's a slight hitch here in that
you'll notice that the itzz is entirely
in the Northern Hemisphere so that means
as winds spiral out from these Cyclones
when they cross the Equator the Corola
force is going to switch so those winds
are going to quite severely change
direction so for example something like
if there's a wind being troll out this
way it's going to come along like this
meet the equator and then switch into
the itzz same thing like over here winds
be throwing out on this side here curl
around go west meet the equator switch
other than that it's the same process as
above
cool and we can also have our kind of
more
poleward subtropical High zones do the
same sort of chick so again wind spirals
out and then it'll come back
around and switch
now for the gaps at least for me
thinking in terms of these kind of
spirals eventually stops kind of making
sense in terms of feeding winds into the
itcz at least at this stage so what I
like to do then is just starting on the
western side of these anticyclones of
these High Press cells I just run
basically a series of winds parallel to
the ones I've already established so for
example I might do something like say
center of the Cyclone I might do
something like this same thing here for
example center of a cyclone roughly say
I might do something like this all
provisional it could well change once we
get on to mapping on the globe and
moving stuff around and making better
sense of this this is kind of very much
a um a sort of an initial
sketch
maybe something like that now it wasn't
really relevant kind of at all here but
there's an important point about
mountains so imagine we had two mountain
ranges let's say we had one like this
running more or less north south and
then one that's running at more of an
angle say something like that in this
instance here if we had the winds coming
in spiraling in like this and they meet
roughly perpendicularly there won't be
too much of effect basically a whole
bunch of air is going to build up here
and then flow over the mountain range
like so if however the wind comes in at
more of a shallow angle with respect to
the mountain range the wind can kind of
like be deviated by the mountain range
like so a WHL building pasta actually
has a wonderful analogy on his blog
imagine putting like a block of wood in
a stream if it's perpendicular to the
stream or to the flow of the stream the
water will just build up behind the
block of wood and flow over it
continuing on its merry way if however
the block of wood was placed at a
shallow angle but respect to the flow of
the stream the stream would just kind of
like split around it so so yeah mountain
ranges can kind of change the course of
these winds but again on my map I was
trying to look out for it most of the
time I'm kind of hitting most of these
round mountain ranges relatively
parallel so not much has gone on here I
mean there's a little bit here but it's
kind of this wind is already kind of
like ducking under the mountain range as
is so just a thing to keep an eye on so
next we are going to complete these
subtropical highs and that's just a
simple case of continuing to spiral out
the winds so again if we start with this
chap here again I'm keeping in mind this
broad sort of spiral so let's say a wind
goes here around like this around like
this around like this this continue this
way something like that start small move
on to the next one and then we'll keep
expanding as we iterate so same thing
here I'll go like that perhaps here here
and while you're doing this what you
want to do is you want to kind of keep
these biased towards East West movement
like don't have spirals that go like you
know north south that's not how these
things work keep them kind of I guess
elliptical along this sort of Axis or
axis rather so same thing over here do
something like
this something like
that and every so often as you're doing
this you be like oh wait hold on this
makes total sense to run another wind
like this into the itz itzz oh my God
that's so difficult
itcc okay something like that and then
I'm just going to keep going and
expanding
these
outwards and leaving a little bit of
room between where they meet cuz we're
going to draw those fronts in in a
second
and also the uh polar front lies between
about 60 and 70° I'm deliberately
Crossing that here again in 3D will work
on the PO so I'm just leaving myself a
lot of error room
basically okay so for a rough sketch
again we'll improve upon it in blender
this is good enough next we're going to
put in where the boundaries between
these different patterns are so for
example here all this wind is coming
along like this and it's going to run
into the back of all of this wind so
we're going to have a
front
created like up along here same Jazz
here this is all coming around like so
and running into the back of this so
again we're going to have something in
fact I might actually just bring it like
this
same thing here this wind is coming
along like so running into the back of
this so I think we'll
have something like this perhaps potato
Pato complete the
map okay fronts marked in now so the
thing here there's a bit of a knack to
this you kind of need to think about
where these fronts will go when you're
drawing these wind patterns and this is
just really a matter of practice because
in general these fronts should appear
between subtropical Highs but biased
towards the one in the west and in
general there should be a more equater
word in the west and more pole word in
the East so you have this kind of a
slant thing going on so I was thinking
about this as I was drawing in these
spirals now admittedly this is almost
too prototypical like it's it's just way
too regular so I think maybe might be an
off camera job I may actually want to
for the sake of Interest put in another
high pressure Zone here so we'll end up
with a whole bunch of like messy fronts
happening here but we'll see for now I
think this is a good kind of
demonstration thing here it is in its
sort of cleanest form okay and with that
we're about ready to export this into
blender but one thing I I should have
done earlier is I should have made these
winds here a really bright color so I'm
just going to select all them and I'm
going to change them to like a a hot
yell yellow just so they stand out more
and I'm not drawing black on black in
blender okay now we're going to save
this as a transparent PNG so we'll take
off all the stuff we don't need there we
go just that and we pop back into
blender then and what I've done here is
I've set up a winds template layer if
you don't know how to set up these kind
of pseudo layers in blender I leave a
link in the usual places to how to on
that and I've uploaded that PNG we just
exported into this layer so if I make it
visible we get this boil delightful so
then I'm going to turn on my Summer Wind
patterns cuz that's what we are doing
and make sure Summer Wind patterns is
selected here in the draw menu this is
the screwdriver and spanner thing on the
right here and all I'm going to do now
is just basically Trace over what we got
putting in some arrows to show
directionality because this was only a
loose sketch we're going to do the
proper one now okay and I think really
all we should do now is just one big
giant time lapse so I guess I'll see you
in uh a few minutes
that's
okay so there's already a couple of
things there uh just this made more
sense to me this circulation pattern
here and it's kind of what I talked
about earlier with the mountains this
came along here and I'm kind of like oh
it's it's like flowing parallel to the
mountains so it's kind of going to go
around the mountains like so and in and
then similar thing here I imagine this
coming over hits this mountain range
fairly perpendicularly so it's just
going to continue over but then
according to the spiral it's going to
drop down and I'm like ah it's kind of
dropping down in between these two
mountains so it's being coralled by it
and so that's where we get this kind of
weird looking shape from it similarly
some of the patterns here in 3D just
make more sense to me so again
continuing down the spiral
and here you know limitations of the 2D
page this is where the edge of the page
was I'm going to just complete this
spiral in 3D and we'll see how it meshes
with this here so
initially I'm thinking perhaps this all
right
onwards
C
hand
C
for
get
okay welcome back um this Bo here gave
me some issues again largely because
there was the cut in the page but I
think I got him worked out now he looks
fairly decent to me okay so what I
deliberately did was I stopped all of
these patterns in around 60 so we have
lots of room for our Polar cell to
operate and we will expand upon these is
continuing to follow the guidelines if
we so need them so let's do that let's
take an orange color and let's create a
high pressure Zone just on the pole cuz
this would be the coldest part here and
then in the
South so in the South it's interesting
here is the pole but we have this all
this like high land just equator or to
it so I'd actually imagine that the
coldest part here would in fact be this
elevated Plateau so going to just skew
it towards that and also it's the winter
hemisphere here so I'm just going to
make this slightly bigger to remind
myself that this is more intense than
what's going on in the north so I think
that's okay let's mark in those wind
patterns so we're in the northern
hemisphere this goes
clockwise is the correct
direction yeah that's the correct
direction and then we go down to the
winter Hemisphere and this goes
counterclockwise I am 100% going to mess
up the directions of these at least once
so uh someone keep an eye on me here and
let me know in comments counterclockwise
counterclockwise counterclockwise sure
okay cool the polar front lies between
about 60 and 70° North and South in the
summer it is closer to the pole so
closer to 70 in the winter it is further
away from the poles so closer to 60 so
we are currently in the summer
hemisphere here so I'm going to go yeah
around about this dotted line so again
I'm just going to spiral out completing
the
spiral something like that now
admittedly these polar easterly are not
exactly the most regular winds in the
world or the strongest and the polar
front is again like hardly the most
regular structure structure in the world
but we're kind of oversimplifying here
just so we can complete the like Global
circulation pattern so I'll do the same
in the South this time going more toward
60 cuz we are in the winter in the
South and I'll keep this one in here so
I'll
just not go as far down 60 just just
because okay done now what we got to do
is just basically go back to our
guidelines and see can we complete
things if there's any gaps between our
winds we derive from the guidelines and
the winds that we put in here in blender
not really much to explain here so I
guess sit back and uh enjoy another time
lapse
okay and final thing we need to do is we
need to just basically trace the high
pressure zones here and the fronts here
I won't do this in time lapse because
there's you know there's nothing else
that I need to figure out the important
bar is already been done so uh through
the magic of editing it should all look
like
this excellent NN hemisphere summer
prevailing wind patterns done and what
you would do now is complete the exact
same process but for half a year later
in classic cooking show fashion here's
one I prepared earlier so here we are in
northern hemisphere winter following the
exact same guidelines as outlined
previously in the video here's summer
winter summer winter and in 2D northern
hemisphere
summer Northern Hemisphere winter summer
winter summer winter and here the are
side by
side oh crap it was all going too well I
just realized there was a thing I meant
to say in followup that I totally forgot
about um just to throw it in here real
fast recall I had said Enzo events would
occur in this ocean El Nino sudden
oscillation see previous video for more
details again in correspondence with my
hydrographer acquaintance shout out Raul
he advised me not to put it here in this
ocean it's too small so it turns out my
initial gut reaction was correct these
oceans here are where the Enzo vents
will occur so just change that up anyhow
that is I think that I hope you enjoyed
and I hope you join me in the next room
where I think we're we're going to be
talking about upwelling coral reefs
fishing all that sort of jazz thanks for
watching folks love you all until next
time Ed
grous