# Upwelling & Coral Reefs - Worldbuilder’s Log 30

good morning interweb warws log 30 so we
are continuing to flesh out our planet
here placeholder named creac we're on
the road to getting climate zones marked
in but in this video I want to take a
little detour off the trodden path and I
want to talk about upwelling and coral
reefs nothing basically got to do with
climate zones whatsoever but at least in
my opinion I think these are really fun
topics to cover but first before we get
into that we got to do some follow-up
Point number one in the last video we
marked in our wind circulation patterns
now a few people got in contact with me
to say that they thought these patterns
were incorrect mainly because based off
these patterns they figured out that you
may not be able to find the sorts of
climate zones we find on Earth or more
specifically this planet may not have
the sorts of climate zones Earth has in
the same locations so for example on
Earth between about 25 and say 35° north
and south on West Western coasts we see
Mediterranean climate zones for the most
part in this region here we probably
won't see Mediterranean climate zones
because this Cyclone here based on what
it's doing in summer and winter probably
makes this an unfit area for
Mediterranean climate zones and that's
entirely fine cuz remember our ocean
currents and our air circulation and
later on our precipitation and our
temperature will be based on what this
planet is doing not what Earth is doing
so this planet has a different axial
tilt this planet has a different
arrangement of land masses etc etc so
all of these circulation patterns will
necessarily be different therefore the
climate zones won't be or at least the
location of climate zones won't be
analogous to Earth and again this is not
a bug this is a feature this is what we
want it would kind of be a failure of
this methodology if at the end of the
day we come out with something that
basically just is Earth we shouldn't get
that we should get something that looks
unique to this planet so I hope that
makes sense I'm not sure how well I
explain in that but I guess the TLD dor
is that we'd expect things to be
earthlike but not exactly like Earth all
right that's Point number one point
number two I have updated my website
artifax scene.com links in the
description if you pop down to the
planet page here you see we have a new
map I really have to change this this is
doesn't look the best but it is what it
is for now more importantly we have this
Bo how cool is that that's so dope so
this this is a false relief uh view of
the planet creac spinning in
space absolutely lovely adore this now I
did not make this I do not have the
skills to make this shout out Andy ker I
think could be ker they are a really
talented blender artist who put this
together for me so shout out to them uh
everyone of you can head on over to
their YouTube channel Andy K arts and
they have a tutorial up on how to create
this this exact thing in blender if you
want to mimic it so go check it out and
go show them some love links in all the
usual places Andy K Arts massive massive
thank you absolutely adore your work
here just just gorgeous and also I've
updated some of the other animations on
the site so here's a tectonic history
animation I won't bother playing it for
you kind of like the ones we've seen
before except just updated play it
history etc etc so uh if anytime you
want to know about the cannon this
setting artifact in.com got you covered
okay that's followup done let's do some
upwelling so let's do some explaining
time before we actually get drawing uh
let's say we have an ocean here's a
bunch of waves how delightful and let's
say we're looking top down on the ocean
and let's say there is a wind current or
wind pattern that
goes this way now you'd think right that
because the wind is traveling in this
direction the sort of net tra travel of
the water would also be in this
direction right that would totally make
sense turns out that is not the case due
to a thing
called emman
transport and don't worry this will all
make sense in a second and what emman
transport basically says is that the net
flow of water will be
90° with respect to the direction of the
wind flow so in this scenario here the
wind is blowing horizontally across the
screen therefore the net flow of water
will be in this kind of
Direction 90° with respect to the
direction of the wind flow which is just
one of those things that you're just
like what even but yeah it's totally a
Thing Wikipedia page links in the
description you can go check it out so
broadly speaking the reason for this is
the Corola force and anytime we have the
Corola Force involved things get messy
and complicated so on a planet let's say
we have some wind directions
here something like that in the northern
hemisphere so we call this North we
expect the net transport of water to be
90°
clockwise with respect to the wind
current so if this wind current here is
going poleward 90° clockwise would be
this way similarly if you're going
equatorward the water will be moving 90°
this way and in the southern hemisphere
we expect the same thing except
counterclockwise so forward 12:00 11:00
10:00 90° counterclockwise quater word
12:00 11:00 10:00 90°
counterclockwise so that in a grossly
oversimplified nutshell is emman
transport now this all seems fairly
non-consequential at this stage but it
actually is really important or at least
very interesting so imagine we're in the
northern hemisphere for argument sake
let's say we have a section of Coastline
here how delightful and let's say we
also have one over here brilliant and
let's say we have a wind pattern that is
running
equatorward and one that is running
hward as per egman transport this wind
current here will be driving a bunch of
water in this direction so towards the
shore like so and as will this trap just
like this guy over here again seems
pretty inconsequential and if we look at
this ins side view so like here we have
a bunch of mountain ranges here's our
ocean bunch of mountain ranges Etc and
there's some water delightful the water
is being driven towards Coastline like
so and similarly here now it can't just
pile up at the coast line indefinitely
things circulate so therefore
necessarily it's going to be forced
downwards in into the deep ocean like so
and this is a thing called
emman pumping or as you may have heard
of it before
downwelling fairly self-explanatory the
water goes down now downwelling is
seriously important in terms of deep
ocean circulation but for the most part
it kind of has little to no World
building relevance so we actually don't
think about downwelling too much I just
want to include it for the sake of
completion what we do think about a lot
or what you can think about a lot is its
counterpart so if we switch the wind
directions forward on this side and
equator word on this side again
following our rule because we're in the
northern hemisphere we go 90° clockwise
relative to the flow of the wind
therefore water is moving in this
direction away from the shore and the
same thing is happening on this side if
this is 12:00 1:00 2:00 90° clockwise
water's moving away from the shore again
this would hold in the southern
hemisphere just the directions would be
reversed so now we have a whole bunch of
water moving away from the shores and
similar to before it can't just vacate a
space circulation occurs so therefore
necessarily a bunch of deep ocean water
is going to be dragged up to kind of
fill in the Gap so this is a thing
called
emman suction or again more commonly
known as
upwelling you might look at this and go
well big but here's the key thing
these deep ocean waters as they rise up
are going to take a whole bunch of
nutrients up with them more nutrients
more plon more Plankton more fish more
fish more fishermen more fishermen
Society Loosely speaking in short areas
of upwelling will be extremely
productive areas and I think worth
noting on a fantasy world cuz it can
help you play place where flourishing
civilizations may be located now it's
worth noting albeit it's not really
relevant to us at all you don't need
land for upwelling to occur for example
along the Equator we expect winds to go
to the West the trade winds following
our rules from before Northern
Hemisphere clockwise respect to the
flows that's 12:00 1:00 2:00 Etc water's
going this way southern hemisphere
counterclockwise 12:00 11:00 10:00 Etc
we have a bunch of water going forward
in both hemispheres therefore
necessarily they're vacating this space
it's going to be filled with deep ocean
water so we'd get a bunch of upwelling
occurring along the Equator out in the
Deep open ocean you could Mark these in
if you wanted to but I find that I'm
just mostly interested in the coastal
ranges not a whole lot of humans going
to be knocking around out here anyways
that is probably the shortest explaining
time we've ever done that's literally
all there is to it we're going to look
for p patterns that look like this we're
just going to keep in mind North
clockwise South counterclockwise we're
going to look at our winds and then
we're just going to label coasts that
our costs where upwelling occurs that is
it so into blender we go so just like
last time I've set up new layer here and
I've called it upwelling if you don't
know how to set up layers I will link in
the usual places to a video covering
that I'm not going to set up a summer
and winter variant to this layer because
we're going to Mark summer and winter on
the one layer you'll see why in a second
so I'm going to select that layer make
sure it's selected over in the draw menu
and then all I'm going to do is just
start looking at some cast so what we'll
do is I'll complete say the Northern
Hemisphere portion of ezri while talking
to you just to outline my thinking and
then we'll go into like a giganto time-
lapse mode all right so let's do that
first thing I am immediately drawn to
this section of Coast here so we have a
bunch of wind coming in like this so
we're heading poleward we're in the
northern hemisphere so with respect to
the direction of wind we want to go
clockwise so 12:00 1:00 2:00 Etc so we
have a bunch of
water moving in this sort of
Direction like so so I vacating this
coastal range here same deal up here so
I think I'm going to I'm going to Mark
in summer upwelling in Orange so I
think basically this whole Coast
here all the way down to about there is
going to be subject to Summer upwelling
oh I'm sorry I should say I have the
summer all my summer layers highlighted
here so we're working in summer yeah I
think that makes sense so we'll continue
upwards here again all of this wind here
12:00 1:00 2:00 Etc so it's going to be
moving this sort of way so it's like
parallel to the coast here not upwelling
but I guess in these
regions I think maybe maybe a little bit
here maybe maybe a little bit here
something like that perhaps yeah for now
we'll go with that okay again 12:00 1:00
2:00 so we got a bunch of water going in
this way so this is hitting our coasts
and or running parallel so no
upwelling okay so no upwelling there
let's pop on over to the North Pole so
again Northern Hemisphere direction of
the wind clockwise so 12:00 1:00 2:00
Etc so we have a whole bunch of water
going this way that is moving away from
the coast how early would that start
so like about here so I'm going to say
maybe this entire section of Coast here
will be subject to Summer
upwelling yeah I don't think much else
here no I don't think much else
here
12:00 1:00 2:00
Etc maybe maybe a small bit
here maybe a
small bit here definitely not long here
because imagine if it's all going this
way 90° clockwise to the wind flow
pattern it's just being smashed into
this Co here so we get a bunch of down
Welding which remember we're not marking
in but we'd we can expect a little bit
to be vacated here so I'll just put in a
maybe a small bit like so I'm not going
to worry about shallow areas for now so
we're not going to worry about any of
this stuff in here but we are going to
worry about the where it borders the
Deep open ocean so 12:00 1:00
2:00 no that's all hitting the
land okay that's fine I think that's all
on this side now we pop on over here um
again Direction 1212 okay so here we get
a giganto one because
effectively I mean this entire
Coast what about
you now here we're going to be more
power out so I think I think this entire
Coast here all the way
along is essentially going to be subject
to that summer upwelling and then what
about here so again this direction 12
clockwise 1 2 so we have a bunch of the
net water movement is this way towards
the
orange portion so that that here is
going to be parallel to the coast so we
can ignore that but I think in
here I think in here we're going to get
something now how far down do we want to
go maybe about here is and we'll
continue up till about here and okay 90°
clockwise again 12 1
two no this is all just hitting into the
shore
and it's basically vacating from the
itzz again that would be equatorial
uaing but we don't need to worry about
it and I'm only going to go as far as
the itzz and then I'll switch
hemispheres later on okay so that like
it's really simple like that's all there
is to it uh that is uh summer upwelling
done and in fact should I put in Winter
upwelling now yeah I'm going to put in
Winter upwelling I'm going to complete
this portion of ezri and then again we
can in Earnest do a giant time so let's
switch to Winter okay so we're now in
winter with our Winter Wind patterns I'm
going to switch to say blue color colors
really don't matter here and we're going
to repeat this process and hopefully
because of the changing circulation
patterns the upwelling zones will change
okay so let's start close to the itcz so
again clockwise
90° so our movement is going to be kind
of this way but we're turning it doesn't
matter we're all oh no it does matter
sorry hold on what am I talking about so
this indicates a sort of parallel motion
to the sure but this chap here and all
of these
chaps
indicate some winter upwelling so I'm
going to say that maybe we get some
upwelling here and down
to about here okay so we'll just do
something like that perhaps so here
again it gets a little bit tricky here
here the winds are kind of reversing
around and we're into the southern
hemisphere here so it's anticlockwise
which means that from this portion here
the net movement is going to be in this
kind of Direction which is you know it's
it's on Shore it's not away from the
shore
so we are fine there so I think this is
the only bit of winter upwelling here
90° clockwise again we're back in the
northern hemisphere so this is all going
this sort of way towards the
equator and this can get a little bit
tricky to figure out
out I mean maybe patches maybe small
little patches so this is going that way
and the movement is sort of poleward
maybe we can see a little bit here in
this Bay Region maybe tiny
bit okay on this side we're dominated by
this pressure system so again 12:00 1:00
2:00 oh and FY I am 100% going to mess
up the directions much like the last
video so someone keep an eye on me and
let me know when I do something stupid
so here we have nothing and we're not
worrying about these wind patterns here
because they are meeting in this front
that is offshore so I think we got
nothing here this way again maybe maybe
a touch here like a teeny tiny touch but
no I don't think so I don't think
so onshore I don't think we got anything
there okay up to the poles let's have a
look see 12:00 1:00
2:00 clockwise and actually just like
before we have water moving offshore so
basically this entire region is going to
be both active in summer and
winter I don't think there's any more
here 12:00 1:00
2:00 on Shore that's no good 12:00 1:00
2:00 so all of this is moving well at
least here is moving into the land
that's no
good and here once again 12:00 1:00 2:00
that's our 90° clockwise Direction so
again we have lots of wind or lots of
water moving this kind of way so I think
this entire stretch is also going to be
year round think
so so we got some year round upwelling
here and here it's all parallel so again
121 2 clockwise so everything's moving
towards the orange thing again and this
is all very parallel so it's fine and
because of the movement of this front
here this is going to mess with this
slightly so again 12 1 2 we now have
down Welling here we now have down
Welling here but we don't have any other
areas of upwelling oh here it's going
this way 12:00 1:00 2:00 clockwise so
this is all moving this kind of
Direction yeah so we're going to get
upwelling occurring here so we're going
to get a little bit of overlap say like
here and it'll go down to and this is
occurring because our like subtropical
High belt or rather like isolated sort
of anticyclones is moving up and down
with the with the seasons so that's
pretty
cool yeah we got nothing happening here
now in the South so again we're
switching now we're going
counterclockwise so that's 12:00 so it's
going to be 12 1110 it's going be in
this direction in the southern
hemisphere which would mean which would
mean cuz we imagine there's lot there's
some wind coming down here and it's
turning this way which would mean we got
to touch of upwelling here yeah we would
there we go cool very cool all right
there we go that is uh I think the
continent of ezri its various upwelling
zones done right that looks pretty sweet
now we just got to do the entire planet
time lapse mode
engaged
here
my
all right and there we go seasonal
upwelling zones done orange is summer
upwelling blue is winter upwelling and
where the colors overlap those regions
would experience year round upwelling
recall upwelling Buffs Plankton and by
extension fish and fishermen Etc this
buff will be at its strongest in summer
when Plankton is like at its most
productive also upwelling will cause fog
on nearby Shores and it's going to Nerf
coral reef formation and that brings us
to the last part of the video coral
reefs so corals corals come in a whole
bunch of varieties but the ones we kind
of concern ourselves with or at least
the ones I concern myself with are the
very enigmatic ones think the Great
Barrier Reef shallow water tropical iCal
corals they hate cold water so they only
exist in regions where the water
temperature never drops below about 20°
Celsius that is to a first approximation
they exist within the tropics within
this Zone here now you'll note the
cutouts in this Zone it's not an
entirely uniform Zone that is because of
upwelling remember upwelling takes deep
water that's very cold brings it up to
the surface corals hate cold water so
they won't like being in these areas now
we're not simulating ocean temperature
here so we're just going to extrapolate
some of the patterns here and apply them
to our planet the methodology is quite
easy number one just Mark out a Zone
spanning your tropics and to carve away
any areas where there's significant
winter upwelling and that's basically
that so I think we can go into our final
time
lapse
all right there we go one Coral Zone
here here there be corals the one thing
I forgot to mention is that in around
the equator you can ignore winter uing
zones the idea being that this region is
always kind of very warm so the
detrimental effect of winter upwelling
on Carls is like less extreme so I
ignored this one here and I ignored this
stretch over here no hard guidelines
just kind of kind of go on feel and like
Artistry I guess same thing over here I
ignored these upwelling zones Etc but
the more polar word we go the less I'm
willing to ignore the winter upwelling
all right I think that's that I don't
think I've forgotten anything if I have
there's always follow up next time so I
hope you enjoyed thanks so much for
watching shout out again to Andy K Arts
links in the description and again shout
out to World building pasta and madin
James wri also links in the description
this method is based upon their work
have a great one folks and until next
time Ed
grous