# Precipitation - Worldbuilder’s Log 31

good morning interweb world with's log
31 today we are getting wet and wild we
are doing precipitation longtime viewers
of the channel will know that I've not
covered precipitation before so this is
going to be completely Uncharted
Territory for me as such I'm going to be
sticking incredibly closely to World
building past's guide links in the show
notes and this is not really going to be
much of a tutorial this is going to be
much more of a let's build now before we
get into things I just want to talk real
quick about coral now on Earth Coral are
really picky about temperatures and as
such we only really tend to find them at
least a surface Coral within the tropics
hence this gray Zone here now a few
people including biid pointed out that
on an Alien Planet alien Coral or Coral
equivalents May function differently
maybe they're more picky about
temperature maybe they're less picky
about temperature Etc so this Zone isn't
really a hard rule but more of a suggest
Ed guideline the closer your Coral are
to Earth Coral the more this Zone
becomes relevant and the opposite holds
true the further away alien Coral is
from Earth Coral the less relevant this
Zone becomes just want to throw that in
there cuz it's an important distinction
to make all right and with that let's
start tackling precipitation for the
first time my maiden voyage let's go now
there's a couple of things we need to do
this one we need a gplates file open
with the topography ocean currents and
air circulation pattern
of the Season we're working in so we're
going to be determining precipitation
for northern hemisphere summer in this
video and as such I've have all the
relevant files booted up here we're
going to need our blender file as usual
now also we're going to be
distinguishing three levels of
precipitation dry wet and very wet and
as such we'll need to add at least two
layers here I've added a summer wet and
a summer very wet you could add another
layer for dry but really you can just
say everything that isn't wet and very
wet is dry I've also add this sketch
layer on top here so we can do some
rough work and to make things a little
bit easier to see I've changed the
blending modes of each of these layers
to soft light to do that you just
twiddle down the drop- down arrow click
on the second input field here and
select soft light from the menu okay so
with our sketch layer selected and the
relevant ocean currents and wind
patterns turned on we're going to start
precipitation by marking in areas where
we have warm currents and onshore winds
so for example here we have a warm
current we have winds blowing onshore so
I'm just going to Mark in the ocean here
that this is a area that's relevant to
us oh and for our purposes here we're
going to count equatorial currents as
being warm currents so we're going to
extend I'm just going to extend all the
way down to the itcz for now not much
more to it warm currents onshore
mark
right those are our warm current onshore
wind coasts identified next we're going
to Mark each of these coastal regions as
receiving a air quot wet level of
precipitation so we're going to switch
over to our wet layer and we're going to
do some coloring in so according to P
there's a couple of things we need to
bear in mind we're going to Mark in
these coasts as being wet if there's no
obstructions this wet region would
extend about 2 km downwind from where
the rains originated if they encounter
if these rigns encounter a fronter to
the itcz they're going to be blocked
also they'll be blocked if if they
encounter very sharp relief again
according to Pasta of about 1,000 M or
more but if there's gradual relief the
reins will gradually continue up the
slope up to around 4,000 M and this is
why we have G plates open cuz we can
measure out all those distances so just
to cover it again in gplates hit s on
the keyboard ensure that you've got the
correct radius in kilometers up in the
top right here and then simply click on
the globe and click again you'll get a
line hover over it and in the top right
it'll tell you the distance in
kilometers so we're going to bounce back
and forth between Jeep plates and
blender every time we need to do a
measurement follow past's guidelines and
color in a bunch of areas so time lapse
mode
engaged
make
we
for
all right that took forever but those
are all of the warm current wet zones or
Coastal wet zones marked in two things
worth noting here whenever I encountered
a region of relief that was extremely
steep at least 1,000 M as per uh War
buing passes guidelines I put in a rain
shadow on the let me get this right
downwind side of the mountain or the Lee
Side of the Mountain the wind is coming
in here it's all wet along the coast
meets a high mountain and creates a dry
rain shadow on the other side now I have
tried long and hard to find some sort of
papers that covers the width of the rain
shadow but to no avail so I really I'm
just eye Bing it here if anyone has any
data on this please let me know okay
Point number two when we think of
coastal regions here we're referring to
like deep ocean regions not necessarily
to continental shelf regions like in
here now World building pasta doesn't
talk about this in his BL post so I'm
not sure as to what the correct answer
is but I figure again let's turn on the
winds if you got a bunch of wind coming
in here it hits this land no major
blockage we'd expect this wind to
continue along this Bay here and pick up
more water and hence deposit it on the
other side of the bay that seems logical
to me so what I've been doing and again
not sure if this is entirely accurate is
and you may have seen me do this in the
time lapse I've been measuring 2,000 km
from the initial contact with land in
the direction of the wind and seeing how
far it'll go and then I'll add on
another nebulous little bit so maybe
like 2,300 2,4 400 Etc if there's kind
of like shallow water in between initial
land contact and then further land
contact if that makes sense and you can
see the same thing happening up here so
we got wind coming in here it meets this
bit of land here it hasn't got massive
high mountains in this portion so I
figure again it'll deposit some moisture
pick up some moisture behind it and
deposit that moisture over on the
mainland so again just to reiterate I
take the initial point of contact
measure out about 2,000 m see how far it
gets me if that makes landfall I assume
that more precipitation has been picked
up along the shallow water so I just
extend it in a little bit more than
2,000 M or kilometers rather sorry and I
think that's everything I think that's
all that I need to chat about uh again
if you need further information I would
highly highly encourage you all to go
check out War building past's post links
in the description Next Step the itcz
remember the it pcz is a low pressure
Zone low pressure wet and in fact this
would be the wetest region on the planet
so what we're going to do as per World
building pasta we're going to Mark out a
zone of influence around the itcz these
blue dots here that extends out about
15° either side of the itcz Dead easy so
let's head into a time
lapse
all right one very rough itzz zone of
influence now what we got to do is we
got to like cut chunks out of it for the
subtropical highs remember high pressure
zones dry so these are in Conflict so
we're just going to erase chunks out of
the itcz around the highs in our very
large oceans we're going to expand the
itcz a little bit on the west W Shores
and if applicable I guess contract it on
the Eastern Shores a little bit so let's
go ahead and do
that now that I think is my final zone
of influence so I'm going to pop over to
my summer very wet layer and basically
any wet areas within this zone of
influence I'm just going to upgrade them
to very wet i. I'm going to paint them
in in a darker shade of the
blue
okay next we are going to add wet areas
in this Zone anywhere where there's
onshore winds be it a cold current Coast
or a warm current Coast same rules as
before you can go about 2km Inland
unless you're blocked by a front a steep
mountain range or I guess the edge of
the itcz zone of influence
last thing for the itzz is to just add
in some extra wet areas around our very
wet areas just to blend them out no hard
rules here at all just
feel right stage two done next up we got
to tackle these fronts just like we did
with the itz Z we're going to Mark out a
zone of influence around these fronts
because these are low pressure zones low
pressure wet the further apart these
High Press anticyclones are that
generate these fronts The Wider the zone
of influence will be and conversely the
closer the high zones are the tighter
the zone of influence will be now
warbling pastel doesn't give any figures
here because it's quite a nebulous thing
but I took his Maps downloaded them and
wrapped them around a sphere just to
measure what's going on based on that at
the thinnest Point these zones should be
about no bigger than about 1,000 km and
at the widest point no bigger than four
although that's a bit liberal maybe
maybe 3,000 km the zones shouldn't
overlap the subtropical Highs at all and
they shouldn't poke into the itcz Zone
too much again I would encourage you to
read World buing pastor's uh blog on
this for more
information
okay done now in testing this part was
the part that I sucked most at I found
that my natural inclination was to draw
these zones a little bit too small and
thus I ended up with like a drier world
so I hope I'm not like overcompensating
here by drawing them way too big we'll
see I can always fix off air just like
before we're going to take any wet areas
in these zones and we're going to
upgrade them to very
wet
cool so next up we're going to add new
wet areas again just like with the itcz
inside these zones anytime we get
onshore wins be they onshore wins on
warm current Coast or cold current
coasts there's a little Knack here if we
pop over to
say yeah say this Zone here you'll
notice that in this strip of land here
there's no Coast within this Zone that
doesn't matter the idea is that winds
will carry precipitation from the coast
into the zone as long as this zone is no
more than about 2,000 km away from the
coast so just eyeballing it we might get
some wet areas here despite it not being
Coastal anyways time lapse mode
engaged all right and final thing we got
to do with these fronts is that the itcz
right is a very stable sort of thing
these midl fronts aren't as stable so
what we're going to do is we're going to
imagine what happens if this Central
pink line were to shift either side of
the Zone we're going to figure out like
what that does to the wind pattern
whether or not new onshore winds are
generated and then put in wet areas in
that region so for example there's a
good one down here yeah this line here
right here's the center of the front
this high pressure zone is sending out
winds and it's kind of skimming along
the front and moving upwards but if this
front were to move over to this edge
here this high pressure zone is then
going to throw off a bunch of
winds onto this peninsula and these
these offshore winds are going to be
pushed back so this whole Peninsula will
gain onshore winds and will add wet
regions there so we're going to do that
for each of the fronts and then that is
fronts completely done I should really
stop saying this but but time lapse
Moree
engaged okay sorry to interrupt the time
lapse but this process can get real
tricky and again I'm not this isn't
really my area of expertise here so a
little bit out of my depth this middle
front we imagine it on the extreme over
here 2,000 km downwind would take us
roughly to the end of this section of
peninsula so that would mean that all
these Onre winds extend all the way
basically to the edge of the zone of
influence which is fine but we also have
a bunch of winds ordinarily coming in
from this anticyclone creating a rain
shadow here so we kind of have something
at odds here under some conditions
there's a rain shadow created here under
other conditions there's a bunch of
onshore winds I think what is prudent is
to Mark in all the wet areas but I'm
unsure so if you should let me know what
you think folks
I think that's done I really find this
step the trickiest to do just cuz it
involves a little bit more visualization
than the other steps but I think I think
it's sorted next up orthographic Reigns
the basic stick here is that we are
going to identify regions of sharp
relief like say this area here to put a
number on that you're looking at areas
where there's about 1,000 M of elevation
change over a very short distance again
like the front of this mountain range
here what's going to happen is a bunch
of moisture is going to be taken from
the sea carried Along by the winds and
when those winds meet this area of sharp
relief they're going to be forced
upwards and they're going to dump their
moisture air go on the up wind side of
mountains we're going to get some wet
areas again we're going to Mark our the
zone of influence that's going to be
about say a couple of hundred kilm on
the upwind side of sharp relief
areas
okay I think that's them all now couple
of points here you'll notice we have a
big steep section of relief here but I
haven't marked it in that's because I
know it's not going to be wet there
because the winds originating from this
high press Zone never travel across
water before meeting this area of relief
therefore they're not going to have
notable precipitation to dump and I
think I'm justified in saying that sea
ice here kind of counts functionally as
land I can't imagine the winds picking
up an awful lot of moisture over sea ice
or at least not an appreciable amount so
I haven't bothered marking this in
similarly there's a couple of places
where I was really close to the
subtropical anticyclones like for
example here we have a bunch of onshore
winds sharp relief but I haven't marked
anything in here because we're just very
very very close to a dry Zone same stick
with this island here we have some
pretty notable relief but we're super
close to the dry zone so I've just put
an X there to be like don't Mark
anything here and actually having
thought about it I think this Zone I
think I'm going to get rid of this zone
of influence as well because whilst we
are crossing a little bit of water it's
not a whole lot and this this wind here
would have met this area of sharp relief
dumped its moisture maybe picked up a
little bit here although that's hardly
the most expansive bit of ocean
regardless would have dumped it here and
I think by the time it gets around to
here it would have just dumped all its
moisture so I think this Zone in fact
I'm just going to go ahead and delete it
cuz I think this zone is erroneous okay
now hopefully you being to see a pattern
here we are going to upgrade any wet
areas under the influence of autographic
rains to very
W right and the final thing we're going
to do on orthographic Reigns is add new
wet areas in our zones of influence and
anywhere where the winds haven't
traveled more than about 3,000 km from
the sea or haven't crossed a major
mountain range and we kind of we kind of
touched on this earlier here off camera
I checked this if we have a look at this
wind here from the coast here to this
area sharp relief is more than 3,000 km
so we were justified in getting rid of
this zone of influence it wouldn't have
any effect and with that let's get
started on new wet
areas
autographic Reigns done now one little
thing here like per the rules this is
the kind of formation we'd get I think
it's a little bit odd that we'd have
like a wet area this really thin dry
strip here so I think I'm just going to
deviate from the rules and just fill out
all of this with wet that would make
more sense to me okay cool done next up
we have le cyclogenesis so if we pop
over to this area here right imagine
this wind here was fairly moisture Laden
right we'd expect it to blow up to the
mountain range the air gets forced up it
would dump its moisture and it would
ordinarily dump its moisture on the
upwind side of the mountain so here
leaving the Lee Side of the Mountain the
downwind side of the mountain bone dry
that's the normal State of Affairs but
when winds blow over a fairly sizable
mountain range say 2,000 M plus they can
create a low pressure Zone on the Le
Side of the Mountain that basically
sucks in a bunch of moisture and creates
precipitation so we are going to go
through the globe and look for areas
like this very high mountain range say
2,000 M plus offshore winds and the open
ocean within about a couple of hundred
kilm of the mountain
range and just like before existing West
areas it within these zones of
influences will'll get upgraded to very
wet and then we'll add new wet areas
again Within These zones of
influences and now for the final
variable before we do the big reveal the
polar front so what we got marked in
here is a very stable polar front winds
spiral out from the poles meeting the
mid latitude winds at roughly the same
latitude basically this sort of thing
here with the boundary region here being
the polar front now more often than not
it does not look like this it in fact
looks more like this with this like wavy
very mobile lobe pattern recall the itcc
was pretty stable our mid latitude
fronts were a little bit less stable and
the polar front is less stable again
it's just constantly changing so to
account for this world building pasta
Advocates adding in a zone of influence
again links in description to the
methodology that extends down to about
40° latitude in the summer Hemisphere
and 30° latitude in the winter
hemisphere so let's do that part
first all right now to model this wavy
pattern we're going to take chunks out
of this zone of influence which by the
way extends from the pole to this green
line we've just drawn we're going to
take chunks out of the zone of influence
broadly following our wind patterns and
hopefully that'll lead to a um a wavy
looking zone of
influence okay two zones placed so
because the polar front is like weak and
Ever Changing we're not going to add any
very wet areas but we will add wet areas
to all coasts within this Zone if the
winds are moving onshore would extend
the wet areas 2,000 km Inland the winds
are moving offshore would extend those
wet areas 1,000 km Inland and if the
winds are moving parallel to the shore
would extend the wet Area 1 and 1/
12,000 km Inland nearly it the home
stretch let's
go all right so here I'm very on decided
as to what to do we got some offshore
winds happening here so we want to bring
the precipitation in a about 1,000 km
now if we Define the edge of the land as
being the edge of the continental shelf
this is a precipitation pattern we get
if however we account for this Bay the
precipitation will be dragged way Inland
into this Basin so I'm just going to be
conservative here and leave it the way
it is maybe someone with expertise could
let me know in comments and we can
always add in more precipitation because
it's the final step um at a later date
or I don't know like this basin's going
to be hella Dr
and we did create this Bay for the sole
purpose of bringing some moisture into
here so maybe even if it's not strictly
correct we should just go with that no
no no I'm just going to I'm going to go
to conservative route someone let me
know in comments what they think and
yeah we'll amend from there anyways
onwards whoops I forgot to cut out this
chap so I'm going have to amend this
zone of influence be right back much
better
onwards
okay that is US done anything that
wasn't marked as wet or very wet is just
going to default being dry we were
working on northern hemisphere summer
here off camera I worked on Northern
Hemisphere winter so let's pop into
illustrator and compare the two seasons
right so this is a state of play in
northern hemisphere summer and here we
are in northern hemisphere winter summer
winter summer winter this world is uh
dry very very dry yeah man I I really do
think we need to do something with this
Bay this is such a massive dry section
in kind of like the the prime latitudes
you know and it's always dry too it's
just going to be like a a midl desert
which I don't know if I like that we'll
see we'll see I'll have a think about it
you let me know what you think Etc oh
here's some side by side comparisons
before we go all very pretty I hope you
enjoyed folks please please please
please go check out World building
pastor's blog I'll leave links in the
description to the precipitation
tutorial massive thanks to himself for
putting this methodology out there all
right that's us take care and
until next time Ed
grous