# Precipitation & Pressure Redo - Worldbuilderâ€™s Log 32

good morning interweb War Brothers log
32 we've done it we've reached the
future it is 2024 so I just want to
start by wishing everyone a very happy
New Year all the best for 20124 May
health and happiness and prosperity
shine upon you all now for this video
we're going to do a really short one
today I would basically just want to
wrap up precipitation I've made changes
I know really out of character I want to
go over those changes so we can clear
the decks and get on to temperature
mapping in the next video but first a
quick note on the website it's been
updated got some new vananga vangog
artwork here for the ocean currents I
think these look really beautiful so
shout out vanga vangog they are open for
commission so if ever you need some
ideally spec bio artwork done vanga is
your man links in all the usual places
now you're going to need to have watched
the previous video otherwise none of
this is going to make any sense assuming
you've done that recall we left off
having created these precipitation maps
and also recall that I was kind of
fretting about the dryness of the world
I hadn't inkling I was probably being a
little bit too conservative with the
precipitation and boy did comments
confirm that basically everyone was like
yeah way too conservative you got to be
more liberal with the old precipitation
there pal and everyone was perfectly
correct so what I did was I spent the
Christmas updating these maps and I have
some newer maps that look like this here
are the old ones and here are the newer
ones the only difference between the old
maps and new maps is that I applied
World building pastas methodology links
in all the usual places just very
liberally like if it was even remotely
possible to get precipitation in the
area no matter how marginal I plunked it
down and these are the results shock
horror things get wetter I mean just
compare old Janar to new janner here
it's essentially been waterboarded it's
that much wet which is great I was happy
with that and that was going to be the
end of the story until I received the
comment from an actual geographer shout
out Ross B goo it's a long comment here
so I'll just leave it on screen you can
pause and have a read of it it intrigued
me so much that I reached out to Ros B
goo via email we had a back and forth a
zoom Call Etc I learned a lot and Ross
was kind enough to provide another set
of precipitation Maps leveraging their
expertise so here they are compared to
what I had come up with and I think the
first thing one should notice is that
they are remarkably similar there are
differences sure but there are not like
night and day differences and I think
that really is a testament to the
strength of World building pastor's
methodology the experts agree
nevertheless differences there are so
I'd like to spend this video basically
talking about those differences what new
information has been brought to the
table and how I might change my
methodology going forward for future
projects and hopefully that might help
some of you guys out too the two big
differences that stuck out to me between
worlding past stuff and rasa stuff is
the inclusion of CA effect precipitation
and the change to the pressure and
circulation regime so let's go over
those two first C effect precipitation
so recall that in World building
pastor's methodology he very often has
you place precipitation up to 2,000 km
Inland in the downwind direction now
that's totally cool for when you have a
large open ocean but if you had a
smaller Inland sea or lake for example
that doesn't really work work like for
example here we have two coastlines a
body of water in between and this body
of water is about 200 km wide it' be a
bit weird for this wind here to dump
precipitation 2,000 km Inland and this
is where ca effect precipitation comes
in essentially as a general rule of
thumb if you have a
fetch that is greater than 100
km then the distance precipitation
proceeds in land is equal to a fetch so
what is a fetch a fetch is essentially
the distance air travels unimpeded over
water so in this instance here we have a
fetch of 200 km and given this rule of
Tom that means that Inland in a downwind
direction we can expect the first 200 km
of the land to receive precipitation so
I guess something like roughly like this
all this area would receive C effect
precipitation and to be a little bit
more precise maximum precipitation would
fall in this area we'll see later how
some other weird things can occur So In
Sum taking into account C effect
precipitation means that smaller bodies
of water on your world will also
contribute precipitation to the land
measure the distances the air travels
over a body of water whatever that
distance is apply precipitation Inland
up to that same amount but don't exceed
the 2,000 km Inland that war building
pasta advocates for cuz the air won't be
able to transport precipitation just
infinitely far inland okay so that's the
first effect and we can see that in play
in Ross's Maps so here is ezri in
northern hemisphere winter we have a
bunch of wind coming in this kind of
Direction in a sort of southeasterly
motion we'll talk circulation in a
second and we can see the sea effect
precipitation occurring here if we take
say this distance here you'll see that
very roughly the precipitation extends
Inland by that same amount now recall I
said that's a kind of maximum precip a
notice that it kind of Peters off until
again the wind is coming this way it
hits a mountainous region the air is
forced upwards and any remaining
moisture that air may contain is forced
to precipitate out so you end up with
this kind of like weird little
precipitation pattern here not something
I would have spotted on my own so again
shout out Ross thank you you can also
see the same thing happening with this
Inland Sea which is just really cool so
the final big change is the circulation
patterns specifically the air
circulation patterns and pressure
systems here is what we had following uh
World building pasta's guide and here
are the changes Russ made now you might
look at this and go oh boy that's like a
wholesale redoing of everything that
looks nothing like what came before but
it actually is remarkably similar again
Testament to the strength of World
building past the stuff notice we have
high pressure zone of the ocean 1 2 3
four of them same thing in the southern
hemisphere four of them here notice we
have high pressure over ezri here this
is the winter hemisphere high pressure
over Jan if we compare that to World
building past this stuff basically the
same outputs occurred 1 2 3 four
pressure systems in the northern
hemisphere same four here in the
southern hemisphere high pressure over
Janar high pressure over ezri the big
difference here is that World building
pasta simulates kind of low pressure
zones with these front systems whereas
Ross puts in kind of like air quotes
proper low press Cyclones and honestly
this is what most World building guides
will kind of have you do or advocate for
and that's part of the reason why I was
drawn to World building past this stuff
cuz I'd never seen this system of fronts
before and I was intrigued to test it
and see what the outputs were like bolt
methods are great but I really like the
cool circulation maps that this system
gets you now if you're intrigued by this
and you want to make something very
similar madin James wres has your back
in her air currents and pressure
tutorial links in the usual places
you'll find that if you follow the steps
she outlines at the end of the process
you will end up with something that
looks remarkably like what Ross had we
have these low and high pressure systems
sometimes forming cells sometimes
forming bands gradiation of pressure
going on very akin to what Ross had now
meline goes over it in her tutorial but
just to put it here because it is kind
of new information for this series the
guidelines around placing these low
pressure systems are basically as
follows in the summer hemisphere place
your low pressure systems in the middle
of large continents the idea being that
the continent the land is being heated
more than the surrounding ocean thus
creating a low pressure system if you
have a large area of high elevation
where this low pressure system occurs
you'll basically end up with an Asiatic
style Monsoon effect the bigger this
region of high elevation or the higher
the elevation the more Monsoon need the
monsoons will be in the winter
hemisphere place your low pressure
cyclone
in the high latitudes next to sea or
glacial ice this is because the heat
differential between the comparatively
cold sea ice and the comparatively warm
oceans creates these low pressure
systems and you can see that here we got
this big slab of sea ice here we have a
low pressure system butting the sea ice
low pressure system here same thing in
the southern hemisphere we have the sea
ice here but also we have this extremely
cold land likely there's tons of
glaciers there therefore we have a low
pressure system forming in this High
latitude over ocean in the northern
hemisphere winds will spiral into these
low pressure systems in a I'm going to
get this wrong I always do
counterclockwise
manner yeah counterclockwise and that's
reversed in the southern hemisphere
winds will spiral into the low pressure
zones in a clockwise Manner and that
fact alone will kind of rejigger the
circulation pattern for the world and
hence give rise to this somewhat
different spread of precipitation so
those are the two big differences C
effect precipitation and including low
pressure zones in the pressure and wind
circulation Maps now at the end of this
all you might go well Edgar that's great
and all but your world is still bone dry
like come on and again that is totally
fine if the world is to be dry it is to
be dry I just don't want it to be dry
because of an error on my part but I
also want to use this opportunity to
talk about just the size of planets
because in general the bigger the planet
the drier the world will be cuz if you
think about if you took Earth and scaled
it up the surface area of the continents
would increase but the max distance
Inland precipitation can occur would not
increase it would stay constant AO
bigger worlds will have assuming the
same land to Ocean ratio will have
bigger continents air go drier
continents and that's what we find here
this world is a bigger world it's kind
of a super Earth so things are drier but
I mean also we have strategically placed
mountains that are just blocking all the
precipitation which again is fine but I
think going forward were I to make
another superer I think I would probably
try to
create many small almost like islandlike
continents and that would help mitigate
the sort of dry effect of large worlds
or just make a a very small world and
then everything is just extremely moist
all right that is that hopefully short
and sweet I'm not sure how long I've
been recording for but I guess just to
to wrap things up in summation going
forward for future projects I think the
method that kind of suits me the most
based on this experimentation is that of
meline James writes she doesn't quantify
things or she doesn't like she doesn't
like numerically quantify things as much
as World building pasta does so I think
I would supplement her methodology with
pasta's numbers and I think that would
produce decent results in terms of
precipitation I would follow warbling
past the stuff but also include Ross's C
effect precipitation in that I think
that's the ideal method again at least
based on this experimentation let me
know your thoughts genuine intrigued to
see what you think or if you have any
alternate methods floating around out
there that I've not been exposed to yet
please let me know all right that is
that bit of a teaser here but next time
we do temperature have a go folks and
until next time Ed grous