# Temperature: Isotherms & Hot/Cold Spots - Worldbuilder’s Log 34

good morning interweb world Builders log
34 welcome back everyone we are
continuing to as always flesh out our
fictional World here placeholder name
creac in the last video we began the
process of working out temperature on
creac by mapping in our continentality
we're going to continue this process in
this video by mapping in our hot and
cold spots and laying down some baseline
isotherms basically we're going to do
this this is my off camera work for
Northern Hemisphere winter we're going
to replicate this but for northern
hemisphere summer but first we got some
housekeeping to do lots of people love J
Chen's render of creac from the previous
video and expressed an interest in being
able to do this by themselves J choken
has come in clutch and created a
methodology links in the description the
one and only vanga vangog is back
resident artist here in araxia he's
created some absolutely stunning
prevailing wind and pressure maps go
check them out they're on the we site
artifac in.com then go check out vanav
vangog again links in the description
and finally shout out to viewer Ross
beio who came up with this method of
temperature mapping that we're employing
in these videos I need to stress again
I'm just going to be working with creac
your planet will likely have different
considerations so I would implore you to
check out the manual temperature mapping
method Linked In the description Big
Love J choken Big Love fanga vangog and
Big Love Ras beo with all that done
let's get temperature mapping so step
one Baseline isotherms these are these
black lines you see here and what these
are are lines that connect up areas of
the globe that have the same temperature
ISO THM equal temperature cool now to
figure all this out we're going to need
to pop over to the world Smith uh for
any new viewers here I created a suite
of calculators ages ago for Designing
fictional worlds links in description go
check it out y y yada now we pop over to
the planet Tab and we're going to scroll
down to average surface temperature here
and make a note of the average temp
temperature of a planet 14° C so next
what we're going to do is we're going to
make a list of all the latitudes from
our Tropics to our poles so in the case
of creac that's 21° north and south to
90° North and South we're going to take
the average temperature of our planet
that 14° c in pretax case and we're
going to stick it on the 40th parallel n
and C so next we're going to fill out
the temperatures from our 40 parallel
all the way to the p and basically what
you do is you take off 0.7 de from each
degree of latitude so we move one degree
of latitude closer to the pole we take
off 0.7 from this temperature here which
gives us 13.3 we move another degree of
latitude closer to the pole we take off
0.7 which gives us 12.6 de C etc etc
rinse and
repeat awesome now we're going to do the
same thing going towards the tropics
except we're going to increase the
temperature by 0.5° C per degree
perfect now this is a little bit too
much data to work with so what we're
going to do is we're going to go every
6° of temperature from the tropics and
we're going to make a note of that so
our Tropics is at 21° latitude and the
temperature is 23.5° that's what the
spreadsheet is Computing over here as
well we take 6° off that that's 17.5 de
check at our table here 17.5 de is here
Celsius and that corresponds to a
latitude of 33° North and South take off
another 6° brings us to 11.5 de C find
it at the table here our closest fit is
11.2 de C and that's at the 44th
parallel take off another 6° of
temperature brings us to 5.5 closest fit
here is 5.6 de C at 52° North and South
etc etc rinse and
repeat and we'll stop here because if we
were to take six off 8.2 it'll bring us
beyond our Pole and that's no good so
I'm just going to highlight all of this
and these will become our isotherms but
before we mark them in what we need to
do is we need to figure out the relative
distance in Latitude between each of
these that's what I've marked here as
Delta latitude so for the first one you
just put in your Tropics that's for me
that's 21° north and south for the next
one the gap between these two is 33 to
21 that's a gap of 12° of latitude next
one is a gap between 44 and 33 that's a
gap of 11 degrees of latitude again etc
etc rinse and repeat done and you'll see
why we need these gaps in a bit right
with that done we can pop back into
Photoshop we'll load up our summer
Hemisphere and then we're going to turn
on our summer circulation patterns in
the atmosphere and you see here we got
our itcz running along the middle like
so this dotted line I'm going to trace
that real quick like so and now we got
all we need to plot our Baseline
isotherms so our first isotherm of 23.
5° C lies
21° away from our itcz so I made a handy
little measurement tool here this is 21°
of latitude 12 11 9 and 8 so I'm going
to take this line it up over the ocean
somewhere just in the middle of an ocean
the best place to do is line it up with
our itzz here very roughly copy the itcz
and then align it with the
measurement like so our next one is 12°
of ltitude ude away so I'll take my
measurement layer get the second bar
here this one is 12° of latitude
something like that take our newer
isoterm copy it shift it up rinse and
repeat as soon as your isotherms run off
the canvas stop there and do the other
hemisphere
and from here we'll slap on the actual
temperature values on each of these
isotherms per the
spreadsheet cool now if you've done
everything correctly you should notice
that in your winter hemisphere you're
going to have more isotherms than in
your summer Hemisphere or put another
way your summer hemisphere is going to
be warmer than your winter hemisphere
summer hemisphere gets down to
-2.6 Winter hemisphere gets down to 8.2
and 6 months later that flips summer
hemisphere gets down to 18.2 Winter -2.6
okay now at this point I have to stress
something very important notice how I've
gauged all of these isotherms off of the
itzz this dotted line in the center of
the map here strictly speaking this is
incorrect what would be more accurate
would be to gauge all the isotherms off
of the thermal equator not the itzz now
I I don't really want to do that here
just for the sake of Simplicity but if
you want to be a little bit more
accurate than I'm being the methodology
the doc has some tips and tricks for
guesstimating how to map your thermal
equator for my purposes here I'm fine
with declaring that the thermal equator
and the itcz are the same thing even
though again I cannot stress this enough
they are not they are related and they
have a similar shape in Parts but they
are not strictly speaking the same thing
I'm just declaring that to be so for the
sake of simplicity so with all that
being said we are going to take these
isotherms throw them into blender and
correct for a distortion because you
just know there's going to be a lot of
it and there we go oh boy I'm not sure
how best to explain it but the way I
think about it is at the final isotherm
before the pole I try and make that
fairly circular and then kind of
increase its Wess as we get towards the
isotherm at the tropics if that makes
any sense or maybe another way is that
the maximum waviness is at the tropics
and we try and kind of iron out the Wess
as we proceed towards the poles such
that the final isotherm is fairly smooth
and circular hopefully you'll see that
in practice during this time
lapse
all right very cool so we got some
before and after before after after
that's Baseline isotherms done now we're
going to do some hot and cold spots now
in this context hot and cold spots
basically refer to regions of relative
warmth or coolness that will further
modify these Baseline isotherms in
conjunction with the uh continentality
we mapped in the previous video worth
pointing out here that the terms hot
spot and cold spot in this context have
no formal definition these are just
terms that have been made up for the
sake of this tutorial cannot stress that
enough let's start with hot and cold
spots on land first ones we're going to
plot are our arid hot spots these will
go in the summer hemisphere only on dry
land between 20 and 33°
latitude okay arid hotpots done didn't
put an arid hotspot on this island here
it's too thin you want your land masses
between wet areas to be greater than
2 to 300 km all right next up Coastal
hotpots again not a formal term so in
both hemispheres summer and winter we're
going to locate any warm water currents
or warm water seas in the mid latitudes
and we're going to throw down Coastal
hotpots up to 700 km Inland in these
regions over low elevation and in the
direction of the prevailing winds if
there's any steep mountains or areas of
high elevation in the regions we're not
going to throw down a coastal Hot
Spot all right Coastal hot spots done
now we do the same thing except for cold
currents or cold water seat
so find your cold currents or cold water
seas in your mid latitudes in both
hemispheres extend Coastal hot spots
Inland about 700 km over low elevation
in the direction of the prevailing winds
if you got steep mountains or high
elevation don't do us just like
before
done next we need to thrw on our
continentality map which is a little
difficult to see hold on hold on hold on
yeah better and we are going to locate
all our hyper Continental zones I only
have one such Zone and that is this dark
orange region here and so we're just
going to plunk a hypercon cold spot not
a formal term in the center of this
Zone
okay and final landbased region are the
Continental cold spots again not a
formal term so if we pull up our
continentality map once again we're
going to say that any Continental region
that is the light orange that does not
have a hyper Continental Zone will get a
continental cold spot in the center of
the Continental Zone oh crap and I
didn't mention this for the last step
this like the last step should occur in
both hemispheres
delightful okay that is the land done so
we're going to move on to the final set
of steps and that is plotting hot and
cold spot again not a formal term in our
ocean and once we got that done we have
all the necessary components to begin
working on our final isotherms I.E our
final temperature map which we'll tackle
in the next video okay so ocean hot
spots and cold spots engaged okay so to
begin with we're going to troll back on
our ocean currents and we are going to
identify any non-tropical guy coal
currents so what I mean by that is this
chap here this is a tropical guy because
it touches the equatorial currents
whereas this chap here it never touches
the equatorial currents that is a
non-tropical guy so along non-tropical
guy Cold current coasts we're going to
extend out a po water cold spot again
not a formal term beginning at the coast
out to at maximum about 1,000 km into
the
ocean now we're going to do the exact
same thing except for the coal currents
in the tropical guers same measurements
same
stick okay ocean CT spots done last step
is to put in our ocean hotspots so these
hotpots specifically tropical ocean
hotspots not a formal term are a little
bit hard to explain but I'll do my best
hopefully it won't be too bad what we're
going to do is from our cool current
zones that we marked in in the previous
step we're going to measure about 2,000
km in a southwesterly direction until we
intersect this equatorial counter
current and we're going to put a mark
there from this Mark we are going to
continue back along the equatorial
countercurrent until we hit land or
rather we're going to continue West
until we hit the east coast of our
continents and then we're going to
extend this guideline up along the
coastline like so now in the summer
hemisphere this can extend up to a
maximum of about 10° to 30°
latitude but it must hug the coastline
so obviously in this case we just stop
here cuz we run out of Coastline in the
winter hemisphere we can go down to
maximum somewhere between 10° and 20° so
something
like this perhaps and then what we're
going to do is we're going to create a
sort of I don't know how to describe
this like a a nozzle sort of
shape something
like
this something like that and we'll fill
it in and this is to basically simulate
all the warm equatorial water piling up
on the east e side of continents rinse
and repeat for all of your equatorial
oceans the bigger the oceanic Basin is
the bigger the structure will be the
smaller the Basin the smaller it'll
be and finally we got tropical sea
hotpots and these are are basically
hotpots that occur in enclosed bodies of
water within the Tropic so I'm thinking
immediately in here this would be an
enclosed body of water and in here those
are basically my two options fill up the
space so now for a bit of finessing
anytime we have a peninsula or an island
or an ithos that's either completely
surrounded by the hot spot or surrounded
on three sides like this peninsula we
can extend the hot spot Inland up to
about 300 km so in this case here I've
already measured that would mean that
all of this peninsula like something
like that and each of these islands
would just get completely covered in the
hot spot all right rinse and
repeat
that is that we are done well at least
for part two in the next video we're
going to take all of these constituent
bits and we're going to warp and move
things around the place to produce our
final isotherms and hence our final
temperature Maps real quick before I go
there's some tidying up left to do here
which I won't do here I'll do on the
patreon only live stream if you are
interested check the description
also again a reminder check the
description for the full methodology
used here really important to check that
out all right that's me I hope you
enjoyed folks and
until next
time Edgar
as