# Temperature: Final Maps - Worldbuilder's Log 35

good morning interweb world buers log 35
today we are going to finish up the
temperature Trilogy we're going to take
our continentality maps from the first
video in this little miniseries and our
Baseline isotherms and hot and cold
spots from the second video in this
miniseries we're going to combine them
together in this video and produce
something that looks like this this is
NN hemisphere summer and this is NN
hemisphere winter now if I may be so
bold I think these final temperature
Maps look pretty baller but achieving
this kind of result is no small feet and
it's a very timec consuming process so
I'm not going to do it from scratch here
instead I'm just going to talk you
through the process I went through step
by step and hopefully that in
conjunction with the full methodology
Linked In the description of this video
will be enough for you to hopefully try
and execute this for your own worlds and
as always massive massive shout out to
Ros B Geo whose methodology this is
absolutely stunning work love these
results now before I crack into it I
just need to make two small changes to
the previous video we forgot two things
apologies first being whenever we have a
mid latitude warm current flowing
poleward so here here here in either
hemisphere we need to add a warm current
hot spot in the ocean like so these
salmon regions here very very simple to
draw just follow the ocean current and
extend the Zone up to a maximum of about
1,000 km into the center of the the
ocean that's change number one applies
year round both hemispheres change
number two applies only to the winter
hemisphere so if you're planet has an
Arctic like ocean a no land going on up
at the pole just open sea with a bunch
of sea ice then in Winter you want to
add a cold spot over said sea ice like
so this cyan region here will need this
to kind of regulate the temperature up
there so it's kind of important to
include this again apologies these
weren't in the previous video so with
that done let's get into
it part one the oceans first thing I did
is I wanted to sort out the temperature
over the oceans it's a good idea to
start here purely because it's the
easiest temperature over land is
complicated over oceans is pretty
straight forward so I started with these
tropical ocean and tropical sea hotpots
these yellow Boos here and all I did was
raise these up by 3° so the resulting
isotherms at the end of this step looked
like this now that is a little bit
difficult to see so I'm just going to
gray out the background like so to get
into the specifics all you do is you
simply ring the shape of the hot spot in
a new isotherm you'll see here that this
blob is contained exclusively between
this Baseline isotherm and this one here
those are my
23.5° CI isotherms so to increase this
by 3° you simply add three to 23.5 hence
26.5 in the summer hemisphere screen top
here the Zone May extend up to about 20
to 30° latitude but in the winter
hemisphere the spread is reduced so only
go as far as about 10° latitude now
sometimes the blob you've drawn will
overlap a baseline
isotherm like in here all you need to do
in this case is just push that Baseline
isotherm out of the way so warp it
around the 26.5 Zone you've just drawn
and just to be clear about what's going
on I'm not drawing in full isotherms
these yellow lines are only the edits to
the Baseline isotherm so when they cut
off abruptly here and here that just
means the isotherm returns to Basel line
these gray lines here just we all on the
same page and that's kind of all there
is to this step like not hard at all
this is northern hemisphere summer and
this is the same thing in northern
hemisphere winter so the next step was
to tackle these cyan zones these polar
water cold spots but before I could do
that I had to sort out the poles in
summer because if we zoom in in
here we see that a polar temperature of
-2.6 in an Arctic like ocean is just
insane compared to Earth so I need to
fix that and what I did here was I took
the final isotherm the most P isotherm
and raised its temperature by 12° so
that brought it to0 6° then I went to
the next equator word isotherm and just
deleted that boil entirely then then I
compare the most p word isotherm to the
next equator isotherm if these two are
the same or the poleward isotherm is
warmer you delete the most poed isotherm
which is exactly what I did here 0.6 de
C and 0.7 de cus are functionally the
same so I got rid of the final two
isotherms like so and I repeated this
process on the other map like so so now
that our polar summers are a little bit
more sane in temperature I went ahead
and decreased the temperature over these
polar water cold spots the cyan regions
in summer in the mid latitudes by 3° and
that ended up looking like this and in
the winter hemisphere I did the same
thing except in the mid latitudes I
decrease the temperature by 6° and that
looks like this and in the other map I
did the same thing in summer I decreased
temperatures by 3° C in these regions
and in winter
things got a little more complicated but
the same rules apply in the mid
latitudes I decreased the temperature by
6° but in the polar Circle I decreased
the temperature by 12° so this 8.2
isotherm here became -3.2 and because of
that I had to create two new isotherms
one at -4.6 and one at
8.6 because we're working with isotherms
that are spaced 6° C apart and the exact
shape and morphology of these isms was
dictated by this cyan region so at this
point it's probably worth taking a
moment to talk about what we mean by
increasing or decreasing temperature an
increase in temperature means that the
isotherms are going to shift forward and
a decrease in temperature means that the
isotherms are going to shift equatorward
and the way we've done this method is
that we've done everything in multiples
or divisors of six so you don't really
need to think numerically you just need
to constantly reference these Baseline
isotherms so for example if I wanted to
increase this isotherm by 3° I know that
that represents a poleward movement of
the isotherm and I know that 3° is
halfway between our Baseline isotherm so
I just move this isotherm up a half step
and continue it
on as far as it needs to go if I wanted
to increase the isotherm by 6° I know
that these are spaced apart by 6° so I
take this isotherm and just move it a
full step upwards polewards to the next
isotherm and continue it on however long
it needs to go if I want to decrease the
isotherm by 3° I move it a half step
equatorward if I want to decrease it by
six I move it a full step equator word
and let's say for argument sake I wanted
to decrease it by 12° well I know that
that is two Baseline isotherm steps so I
just drag it all the way
down skipping one
isotherm and continue it on here so
increasing temperature move the
isotherms pull word decrease in
temperature move the isotherms
equatorward and think in terms of half
steps and whole steps with respect to
the Baseline isotherms that are spaced
6° C apart next I tackled these salmon
regions here in summer they ended up
looking like this and the basic method
here is that you take the isotherm
closest to this kind of Trans Ocean
Westerly current and you raise that
isotherm following the boundary of the
salmon Zone up over it and just stop it
on land for now like before this crossed
a whole bunch of other isotherms so I
just warp those up and around again just
stopping them at the coast for now we'll
get to them later that's for the summer
now for the winter all I did was
increase the temperature in these
regions by
3° or move the isotherm poleward by a
half step that's northern hemisphere
summer and
here are the changes in northern
hemisphere winter and then you'll note
that the final ocean based zones are
these blue regions along here here super
easy here all I did was year round
summer or winter I decreased the
temperature by 3° or a half step in
those zones and the resulting isoterm
modifications look like
this again this is Northern Hemisphere
winter and here are the modifications in
northern hemisphere
summer and with that our oceans are done
and we go on to part two the
land now as mentioned things here get a
little more complicated well in fact a
lot more complicated or not comp it
timec consuming first thing I did was
tackled these arid hot spots these red
regions in the summer hemispheres only
for northern hemisphere summer the
result of this step looks like this
which looks like a mad change so let me
just take a few beats talk you through
this so what I did here was I identified
the shortest axis across a given arid
hotspot Zone in this case it would be
this north south axess I measured it in
G plates if it turned out to be roughly
500 km in distance I increased the
temperature of this Zone by 3° with
respect to the Baseline isotherms so
that's what occurred
here and in both of these arid hotspots
as well now things get a little more
complicated if the Arid hotspot zone is
extremely expansive but the same
methodology applied I looked at the
shortest axis again north to south I
measured it in G plates it came out as
being I think it was around 2,000 km
what I did was I divided that by 500 km
basically seeing how many times bigger
it was than the other arid hotspot zones
that turns out to be four times bigger
and then for every additional kind of
500 km I increase the center of the Zone
by 3° C so at Baseline we're at 23.5
that means
23.5 plus 12° c means that the center is
at about
35.5 de C which you'll see here now when
I say Center it's not actually a point
the center will be a sort of blob that's
about 500 km by 300 km that's 500 km
East to West 300 km north to south and
this sort of blob won't be but won't
necessarily be in the center of your AR
hotspot Zone
rer it's going to be skewed towards the
area of the highest continentality so
it's a little bit hard to see here so
apologies but within this arid hotspot
we have this sort of turquoise Zone
which is an oceanic zone we have a
yellow zone here which is a
subcontinental Zone and an orange Zone a
continental Zone the Continental zone is
the highest conal out of those three so
what I did was I kind of skewed this
blob to the
Northeast just a little bit so it's not
dead center in this Zone it's skewed
towards the region of the highest
continentality once I had that blob
located every 100 to 200 km north to
south the temperature drops
by about 1° so I made a guide here each
of these dots being somewhere between
100 200 km so we got 35.5 34.5 33.5 32.5
I drew an isotherm in and I continued
this process until I made it back to the
Baseline isotherm which is 23.5 which
was this Buckle boy up here and I joined
them back in to the Baseline isotherm
now you'll not as well here that in a
north south Direction these isotherms
are kind of kind of fairly well spaced
out but in an East West Direction they
kind of Clump together particularly as
they meet the coast that's expected you
should try and emulate that and that's
all there is to is it's labor intensive
but it's not tricky at all again this is
northern hemisphere summer and here's
what it looks like in Northern
Hemisphere winter see this region down
here so that was the irid hotpots in
summer so now we do the same thing but
for the cold spots in winter so namely
this hyper Continental Zone up here this
Continental Zone
and on the other map this Continental
Zone down here again things get weird
and wild particularly in Winter and the
result of this step turned this map for
northern hemisphere winter into this map
which I know insane difference but again
I'll talk you through it so if we take
this section here in this hyper
Continental Zone this sort of Bluey
purpley region here in the winter I drew
a blob that was 500 by 300 km 500 km
East to West 300 km north to south exact
same The ared Hot Spot somewhere in the
center is of this region I had a look at
the Baseline isotherm temperature which
is
0.7 and following the method laid out
into the dock Linked In the description
I decreased the temperature in this
region by 30° C so this became
36.7 and then again just like the our
hotpots I set up a guide and every 100
to 200 km equatorward to poleward north
to south the temperature increases by by
1° C so I basically set up a a series of
Dots here counted off the temperature
until I got to the next multiple of six
isoterm and then drew that in so if this
is 36.7 this chap here is -3.7 but we
already have a
-3.2 again these are close enough that I
just hooked these up so instead of
completing the blob in this region I did
a kind of like half blob and then like
hooked it back up to the isotherm we had
already drawn from the previous step and
then it was just case of repeating that
cycle I counted off another 6° of
temperature increase Drew another set of
isotherms kind of followed the shape of
this peanut looking thing here
distorting it around Coast lines and
hooking it back up to what we had
already drawn the key thing to sort of
pay attention to here is that in the
winter hemisphere we'd expect isotherms
to kind of belly downwards towards the
Equator so we get kind of equatorward
pointing curves and we also kind of tend
to find these sort of sweeping s shape
motions as well and that for the most
part these new isotherms that we're
creating are limited to the land because
we're dealing with land continentality
and that's why we end up with these
regions of kind of like extreme
congestion where all the isotherms kind
of bang together and the same method
applied over here this time we don't get
down as far as 36.7 again see the
document for rules on how much to drop
the temperature over these particular
zones but we do kind of get this sort of
distinctive I guess lean to it and
what's going on here and this is also
very important is that I'm skewing again
these isotherms towards regions of high
continentality so again this orange
region here is our Continental Zone that
has a higher continentality than the
subcontinental this yellow and the cyan
turquoise here which is oceanic so I'm
kind of biasing my equator or dips
towards this orange Zone and the final
thing I'll say about this is don't be
too worried about the exact shape of
what's going on there's a checker step
later on down the line which will help
kind of like make things a little bit
more realistic so I I reckon just sketch
go at it and you'll be fine with the
later step anyways that is Northern
Hemisphere winter and here's the
modification to this Continental Zone
down the bottom here in northern
hemisphere
summer same procedure as before draw a
blob do to correct temperature
modifications p a dock Linked In the
description set up a guide count off 6°
to get to your next isotherm draw that
in rinse and repeat until we meet some
sort of barrier like a coastline and
then densely pack these isotherms
together fairly simple to do just very
very very very time consuming so now we
got our ired hotspots and our hyper
Continental Continental zones done it's
time to look at these regions here these
warm current hot spots and these cool
current cold spots for the warm current
hot spots in the mid latitudes on West
coasts all I did was I simply took what
i' had already done and just extended it
across the warm current Zone ready to be
modified further in a later step super
easy you see the same thing here and
that is in summer only no change to
Winter then for East Coast warm current
hot
spots those between the tropics and
about
48° I increased their temperature by 3°
and as always warped any overlapping
basine isotherms around the increase
that's our orange zones done in the West
and in the east in the summer but you'll
also find that you'll have some north
south coast orange zones here again I
appreciate it's kind of hard to see lots
of colors going on here here we also
want to increase the temperature by 3°
but it felt really weird to me to take
this isotherm and move it a half step
towards the next Baseline isotherm just
because why would the ocean be
experiencing this temperature increase
it would just be this thin sliver along
the coast here on my north south coast
so I did instead it just felt more right
to me I I kind of increased the Baseline
isotherm just by a tiny bit on either
side shifted it forward that is to kind
of just indicate that there's a there's
some something happening in the middle
here in terms of a warming effect this
is very much a feel thing again practice
trial and error but where the hot spot
was kind of closer to the Baseline
isotherm I did increase it by a full
half step by a full 3° but again here
the hot spot is very far away from the
Baseline isotherm so I just dipped it
down and had just a very slight increase
just to kind of hint at that in the
winter hemisphere in these orange
regions there was no increase between
the tropics and about 40° latitude but a
3° increase beyond that in this Zone
which given that I had messed with this
bit so much figuring out the
continentality the only real
modification in the winter hemisphere
was this bit here so those were the
changes for norn hemisphere summer and
for Northern Hemisphere winter those
changes looked like
this and finally the cool current cold
spots I just decreased the temperature
of those by 3° in the summer hemisphere
only so summer down south here at the
end of this step the isotherms look like
this very subtle change but a change
nonetheless Northern Hemisphere winter
and northern hemisphere
summer so now the last thing to do here
is to join up these erand isotherms we
just kind of left them hanging here they
need to join back up with their
counterparts here in the west same thing
over here now this step involves another
drastic change but again I'll talk you
through it so the isotherm that we swung
up above above the warm current Hots
spot on land and in the ocean we
continued it across the warm current hot
spot and from here what I did was if the
Baseline isotherms were arcing poleward
which they are in this case I continued
this isotherm parallel to the poleward
arcing Baseline isotherm dragged it
across and then basically using field
tried to hook it back into its
equivalent on the west coast the exact
shape here you're going to get wrong for
sure but again we got a checker step
coming up in a bit and that'll sort it
out so don't worry too too much just
concern yourself with The
poleward Arc of these isotherms that's
kind of indicative of Summer hemispheres
in summer hemispheres we'd expect the
isotherms to Arc PW in Winter
hemispheres we expect them to Arc
equatorward if that's not happening
you're doing something wrong so now that
I hooked up this boo here I had to do
the exact same thing with this chap here
I confined him to the land so we got a
bit of squishing going on here dragg
them across and again tried to hook them
up where it felt logical but the final
isotherm the most polar isotherm we have
this one I moved out into the ocean so
the basic stick is you want to be at
least about 10° latitude away from this
initial polar jumping isotherm so that
dragged it up into the polar ocean and
again round like so and I tried to hook
it in where it made sense and the only
other thing is that the next equator
word is term down here it also will need
to kind of leap polewards so again just
by feel I just drew a random sort of
poleward Arc and again tried to hook it
in where it felt natural and I did the
same thing over on this continent too we
got our initial poleward jump isotherm
it gets dragged across the warm current
Hot Spot then I move it forward in this
case the Baseline isotherms were were
not pointing in the correct direction
their poleward Arc was over here so I
kind of skewed the poleward movement
over to this area of the continent and
then hook the back up to where it needed
to go next chap here kind of follows a
similar pattern and then the final one
the polar one is not contained to the
continent it is in the open ocean here
and then the equator one down here same
thing again I need to Arc It Forward
skewing The poleward Arc to this sort of
area here relative to the baselines and
hooking it back in you will get this
wrong it's fine draw in something the
Checker step will take care of it for
you
so that is the effect in northern
hemisphere summer and this is the effect
in northern hemisphere winter before and
then
after okay so that is the land done next
step step three is the continentality
Checker so now at this point I have no
way of knowing whether or not what I've
drawn is in any way realistic like for
any given region on the planet do I get
the correct summer and winter
temperatures so to kind of ensure that
we get as close as possible to kind of
the predicted reality of a given
earthlike Planet I had to go through a
sort of temperature checking phase and
the basic stick here is that you could
go mad taking temperature all over the
Gaff but at a bare minimum you want to
be taking the temperatures of your hot
and cold spots specifically you want to
take the temperature of your cold spots
during winter and use the chart we
talked about in the first episode of
this little Min series I think to
compute the equivalent summer
temperature so for any cold spot take
the temperature in Winter use the chart
to compute the summer temperature
conversely for any hot spot take the
summer temperature and use the chart to
compute the winter temperature so once
you've done this you'll end up with a
whole bunch of kind of notes like this
all over your planet with a bunch of
kind of expected temperatures so for
example if I say up
here this hyper Continental Zone here
the cyan dot here tells me this is the
location it is I am because it is a
winter check I checked the winter
temperature it came out as- 36.7 we are
in this Red Zone here which is a hyper
Continental Zone and we are somewhere
between 50 and 60° North let's call it
about 55 so I pop on over the chart the
latitude is between 50 and 60 and it is
a hyper Continental zone so we'd expect
there to be a 48 to 57° C change between
the winter and summer temperatures for
the sake of Simplicity work with just
the lowerer end of the range so 48° C so
I took that 48° c added it to 36.7 th
giv me a predicted summer temperature of
11.3 De and if we look at these
isotherms here this is the 17.5 Dee
isotherm and this chap here is the 112°
isotherm so as it happens my 11.3 Falls
in between these two isotherms so I'm
gravy I can add a check and say that
those temperatures are realistic now I
could have you know I could have moved
these isotherms a little bit or whatever
but again I think it's more than good
enough just to be in the correct Zone
okay so that's an example of how you
compute from Winter from your cold spots
so to compute from the summer hot spots
we can go down to say maybe here so I
have a red dot which means that I
checked in the summer hemisphere which
is on the other
map over we here this region is we'll
call 26.5 de C so we make a note of that
and we are in this sort of yellow region
here which is our subcontinental Zone
and we're also between 20° latitude and
30° latitude so subcontinental between
20 and 30° latitude working with the
lower end of the range means there
should be a 15° temperature swing so our
summer temperatures are 26.5 so we'll
subtract that lower end to get a
predicted winter temperature of 11.5 5
and in this instance we are not where we
want to be this is our 11.2 Dee isotherm
and this Baseline isotherm here is 17.5
so this is in the wrong location so we'd
have to take our 17.5 de isotherm and
move it forward or sorry move it
equatorward and that is the next step
after having taken all of these
temperatures and finding out which
regions are correct and which aren't you
can kind of go in and what I did was I
very roughly sketched where these
modifications should be to make
everything line up so for example here
I've taken this 11.2 de isoterm and I've
scooted it right up to here and I've
taken this 17.5 and scooted it up to
here so now this point this 11.5 de in
winter is in between the correct
isotherms and anytime I didn't need to
make a modification I just put a little
tick to remind me what I've done so
you'll end up with this incredibly messy
look map with lots of sketches and
modifications Etc going on and there'll
also be a whole bunch of places like
here for example where you may feel the
need to take extra temperature
measurements just to really figure out
what's happening in that case always
measure from the summer hemisphere
that's very important just to be
consistent so again just drive the point
home and apologies for the messiness but
this is what it will look like when you
go to do it I took the temperature of
this point here it was 10° in summer
based on the latitude and the
continentality Zone I had to take off 42
which brought us to -32° and that is in
between between these two isotherms so
again I move them around Etc lots of
patience require for this step but
ultimately it's the only real way of
doing this sounds simulating things and
ensuring that your temperatures are in
the correct kind of bands and locations
and once I was happy with these edits
and sketches I made I simply codified
all of this into a slightly neater
looking set of isotherms so something
like
this oh and you'll note as well as a
little aside see the way our Baseline
isotherms are kind of humping in the
middle of the ocean if you look at Earth
that just doesn't happen so for whatever
reason at this stage I decided to just
iron those out over the oceans in
general over the oceans unless there's
some sort of obstruction the isotherms
would be fairly even they won't undulate
very much so that was northern
hemisphere summer I did the exact same
thing for Northern Hemisphere winter I
took a whole bunch of temperature
measurements made a sketch to kind of
move things around the place I was well
off with these Boos here took that
sketch and cify it into something more
clean like so and with that that's the
continentality Checker phase or step
over with final step is step four I
think it was wasn't it yeah
elevation so the eagley amongst you will
have realized that we've made absolutely
no reference to elevation here
throughout this entire method and that's
by Design up until this point we treat
the world as having zero elevation and
as a very final step we add elevation
back in as a fact Factor now obviously
we all know that if you increase in
elevation the temperature drops exactly
by how much can be a rather complicated
Affair to figure out so as a sort of
first approximation we'll set the rule
that for every th000 M of elevation you
gain the temperature drops by 6° which
is extremely useful given that we're
working with isotherms that are spaced
6° C apart and much like the previous
step you can drive yourself mad just
endlessly checking all sorts of
elevations I would not recommend doing
that what I would recommend doing is
only checking every th000 M so for me
that is CA level which we've already
done 1,000 M 2,000 3,000 and 4,000 the
way you handle this is you uh find a
mountain range let's take this chap here
and you note that it lies this portion
of it here anyways lies between this
isotherm and this isotherm this is beige
color I know for me that's a th000 met
up therefore it shouldn't lie between
these two isotherms it should in fact
lie between these two isotherms
and to make that happen all we need to
do is take this isotherm and drag it
along the perimeter of the mountain
range please be more uh careful than I'm
being here like so this section of the
mountain range here lies between this
isotherm and this isotherm it's 1,000 M
up so instead of lying between these two
it should lie between these two now I
could come in here just like before and
do something like this although it just
feels better to me to kind of create a
little Enclave
like something like that now for our
next elevation step up these kind of
dark brown colors they decrease Again by
6° by a full step so they are lying
between this isotherm here and this
isotherm these two we need to go full
step colder so they need to go back up
to here to lie between this one and this
one well we've just created that Enclave
here so we'll just extend that Enclave
down except this time only covering the
brown areas and also just a a point
about scale here at this scale you're
not picking out individual mountain
peaks here obviously not so don't be too
shy in creating abstract representations
of what's going on like this Ridge here
is basically just this giant blob Etc
and you repeat that the whole way
through so on and so forth and that's
basically it just think in terms of
steps now you'll see here if you're
working in a monochrome uh fashion like
I am here it can get very confusing as
to what is what so I highly suggest
working uh in a color Cod of fashion so
color code your isotherms if you do that
and apply all the rules correctly you
should end up with a final final Final
map that looks something like
this I just grade out the background a
little bit more just so you can really
see these isotherms pop looks really
complicated again it really isn't
complicated to figure out it's just very
very very labor intensive this is
northern hemisphere summer and this is
Northern Hemisphere winter
summer winter
summer winter and as much as I love this
neon Fest that's going on here it's a
little bit hard to read plus I have no
measurements marked in so I just went
ahead and created these kind of
clean-ish final temperature maps and
once again summer winter summer winter
and a little bit of side to side action
just to finish things off cuz that is
basically that each individual step not
very difficult to execute just it takes
a lot of time be prepared to set aside
if you're working like say evenings and
weekends 2 weeks maybe of work to get
this done it's very labor intensive if
that's not something you're into you got
to simulate temperature I'll direct you
to World building pasta links in
description also remember links in
description the full methodology you got
to read that document to get a full
picture of what's going on and you know
what I'll do as well I I'll Chuck this
file here this Photoshop file uh I'll
leave a download Link in the description
to that as well so you can go look up
what I did reverse engineer Stuff Etc oh
and final thing thanks a million to Ross
B for putting this method together once
again chef's kiss just beautiful thanks
a million for watching folks that was
temperature that was me so
until next time EG
GR