# Polar Climates - Worldbuilder's Log 36

good morning interweb War withs log 36
we are as always continuing to WHL build
our fictional Planet here placeholder
named creac in the last videos we
finished up our temperature Maps so it
is high high time we get Kraken with our
climate zones but first some background
info for anyone who's not been initiated
longtime World Builders would be more
than familiar with this map here this is
a map of the C
climate classification system it's a
widely used way of describing Earth's
climates and it's I think the most
popular way of depicting climates on
fantasy worlds in the war buing
Community as well so we are going to
stick to the road well trodden and
emulate this for my Planet here creac
the Kent system defines climate zones
based on temperature and precipitation
seasonal temperature and precipitation
and it divides things up into five broad
groups namely a climates B climates C
climates d clim clat and E climates
stunning naming system and within each
of those imly named groups there's a
bunch of like sub climates so we are
going to ease into things today and
we're going to tackle the easiest of the
climate groups to deal with and that is
the e- climate AKA The Polar SL Alpine
climates oh actually and before we crack
into that just an important note here
this map here is a map of climate zones
it is not a map of Earth's biomes
climate zones and biomes are related but
they are not the the same thing and you
can't use those two terms
interchangeably that is a thing I've
never expressly stated in previous
videos so I just want to set the record
straight here a tldr and way
oversimplifying it because I don't want
to get into it here biomes at least in
part are based on biological factors
climate zones at least in the cop and
climate classification system are not
right back to our e- climates our polar
climates you'll see that they are
divided into two subcategories here ET
climates and EF climates ET climates are
Tundra climates shown in the sort of
like really difficult to see medium gray
here and the EF climates shown in the
much easier to see dark gray here are
ice cap climates okay now I'm pretty
sure we all know what a tundra climate
zone looks like but just as a little
refresher let's pop over to West
Greenland and this is basically it the
key sort of thing you'll find here is
that there are basically no trees just a
bunch of low vegetation you got
permafrost it's a bit boggy it's a bit
swampy you know the tundra again I'm
sure we're all aware what ice cap
climates look like but if we pop on over
to the Antarctic peninsula there you go
a typical ice cap climate just ice ice
and more ice no vegetation and like
basically no real life save for the odd
gaggle of penguins and uh whatever mad
lad happens to be hiding out in this
cute little red cabin now anyways
plotting these two climate zones on our
fantasy world is dead easy you'll see
here the ice cap climate zone by
definition occurs in regions where the
average monthly temperature never
exceeds 0° Celsius you got to be
freezing to build up all that ice right
so for our worlds all we got to do is
Mark in our ice clap climate zones in
regions that are 0° C or less in summer
like so I just be absolutely clear as to
what we're looking at here this is like
a a composite map the top half of the
map is northern hemisphere summer the
bottom half of the map is southern
hemisphere summer like I'm overlaying
the two summers together because it just
made marking things out way easier all
right that's it that's our EF ice cap
climate done 0° C or less in summer ice
cap gravy now our tundra climate again
definitionally occurs in regions where
the warmest month has an average
temperature between 0 and 10° C so like
before we just we Mark in a tundra
climate zone in any that's between 0 and
10° in summer like so now remember we
are working with isotherms that are 6°
CI apart so my 10° line would fall
somewhere within this sort of like
beigey light yellowy zone so there's a
little bit of kind of like artistic
license to where exactly you draw the
boundaries if they don't needly meet up
with our isotherms that are 6° C apart
also make sure you meticulously check
everything like you'll notice here
there's a little bit of a tundra zone
happening inside the tropics because
it's at elevation so don't just assume
that your Tundra and ice caps are
limited to the very low latitudes check
everywhere right I'm that that's it done
Tundra done ice caps done e- climates
done we're good all right folks thank
you for watching see you all next time
edar
out but like really it's not over you
know me you've seen these videos this is
but the tip of the iceberg lol Iceberg
get it glaciers Iceberg ice caps I I'll
see myself out now so now we know where
our ice caps are or more importantly our
ice sheets we have to acknowledge the
fact that ice sheets are thick with like
three seas like the Antarctic ice sheet
is like several kilometers thick in
certain places that adds elevation to
our world which in turn modifies the
temperature so I guess it's back to the
10th layer of
temperature mapping for
me so broadly speaking we can think of
like the glaciers that form in these ice
cap regions as coming in three flavors
they can be either ice sheets ice caps
or ice Fields many more Glacier types
exist but at this sort of scale those
are the three I'm going to concern
myself with ice sheets think massive
glaciers like Antarctica and Greenland
they can occur in ice cap climate zones
that are 50,000 Square km or bigger in
area and that at least in part have
low-lying regions associated with them
the other type ice caps they're
something similar except they'll occur
in regions that are less than 50,000
Square km and finally ice Fields occur
exclusively in mountainous regions ice
sheets and ice caps are known as
unconstrained glaciers in that they just
dominate topography they don't care
about topography they just overwrite it
ice fields are constrained graziers that
kind of exist within the topography
their shape is defined by the topography
so given all that I went into G plates
and I measured kind of each sort of
discreet ice cap climate zone I marked
out here measured its area and notated
whether or not it was a sheet a cap or a
field so if we zoom into to say the
South here we can see all three types
happening this section here exists
completely in Highland regions it's not
down near the coast in low-lying regions
at all so I called it ice field all of
these islands here they do have some
Highland regions associated with them
but there's also some low-lying stuff
here and the ice cap climate zone is
lying over all regions here so this guy
is a sheet and this guy is a sheet these
two big Islands here because they
measure more than 50,000 Square km
whereas these little tiny Islands here
are less than 50,000 sare km so they're
going to get marked as ice caps and I
did the same thing for every ice cap
climate zone region on the
planet so now that I know it's sort of
dominant morphology of the glaciers that
are forming in these ice cap regions I
can make some kind of goodish
estimations about uh what elevation they
will add to the world so the first thing
to note here is that for ice Fields I'm
going to say that there's no change in
elevation again these are constrained
glaciers so they're kind of like think
of them as like fitting into the knoks
and crannies of a sort of mountain range
or Mountain Plateau they're not growing
over the mountain range and dwarfing it
in dominate it they're just sitting in
the mountain range so all of these ice
cap regions along here are not going to
add any elevation so it's worth noting
that this is an artistic choice on my
part and quite frankly a choice I made
to keep my workflow down I really really
didn't want to go in here and have to
mess with all of the elevations
everywhere I just declare that any
glaciers here do not overflow the
mountains but you could just as easy
look at this and say hey these are vast
swads of land here way bigger than
50,000 Square km so the glaciers build
up so much that they like spill out over
the mountains and become like ice sheets
proper you could totally do that I'm
just being very lazy let's be real so
ice Fields No Effects now for ice caps
to figure out how much elevation they
add there's no or at least I don't think
there is or I haven't come across a
mathematical formula to do this for you
so we have to resort to taking the
average thickness of the ice caps we see
on Earth about 100 to 500 M we divide
that by by the planet's gravity because
the higher the gravity the more squat
land forms will be the lower the gravity
the higher things can build up whatever
average thickness we get here we
multiply it by two two times average
thickness to get the Dome because
unconstrained graziers like ice sheets
and ice caps like if we imagine this is
a section of land here putting it kind
of overs simplistically their shape
would be something
like this where there's kind of like a
high Central Point here there can be a
couple of of high points in the middle
here but in the simplest case there is a
single kind of like high Dome point and
that is given by two times the average
thickness so now on my world even if I
were to select the highest possible kind
of earthlike ice cap given my planet's
Gravity the added elevation is not going
to be enough to drop the temperature
appreciably cuz remember we're working
with isms that are 6° C apart so we'll
need to add at least 1,000 M of
elevation in order for me to come in
here and draw new isotherms which we
just would not get from this formula so
for my world ice caps they add elevation
but it's so minuscule that I don't need
to mess with my temperature map I will
need to mess with my topography map so
uh patreon live stream that's a thing
I'll probably do there if you're
interested links in all the usual places
and so we come to the final one the big
boy the ice sheet these have the same
morphology as ice caps except they're
just much much much bigger we have to
select an average thickness scale that
with gravity multiply it by two to get
our D height now for for values here the
average thickness of ice sheets on Earth
they vary drastically so let's just say
less than 2.3 km and you're okay so for
this particular ey sheet here I got an
average thickness of 1.75 km and a dome
height at 3.5 which is enough for it to
override this topography which I think
only gets up
to 2,000 no it gets up to 3,000 and for
a big gigal ice cap region in the South
same procedure applies I made this
extremely high the the idea being that
this world is a little bit colder than
Earth so I really wanted to like push
the height as much as I could to drop
the temperatures as much as I can while
maintaining some modum of realism so
average stickness about 2.1 in the South
the Dome height at 4.2 again I need to
stress you can have multiple domes I was
trying to keep my life easy and just had
one Dome per kind of discreet I
sheet so with all that in the bag I pop
back into Jeep plates for another quick
not so quick session where I marked out
uh the new topography that the eye
sheets add so these are topographic
Contours here at 1 kmet intervals now if
you're going to do this yourself Pro tip
you want to have these Contours be kind
of spaced very evenly unless you meet
some sort of barrier like say a
shoreline in which case they can stack
quite tightly cuz this is what we see on
Earth and also just think of ice sheets
again like you know squiding honey onto
a surface to sort of shape the honey
forms as it kind of spreads out would be
very akin to what ice sheets and ice
caps are doing and you can see here with
the Contour L these are really really
evenly spaced and they begin to kind of
like get more densely packed as they
reach the sea as they reach your barrier
same thing over here and here so try and
keep these contour lines don't look at
this this is really messy there's lots
of topography going on here but for your
big chunky thick boy ice sheets keep
those uh contour lines equidistant
spaced so yeah I did this in the north
here and I also did this in the South
we're pointing out here just a little
fun fact the tallest point in this Dome
is 4.2 km that actually represents the
tallest point on the entire planet so
like this world's Everest is an ice stor
which I just think is pretty
cool so with these Contour drawn in at
1,000 M intervals and remembering from
the previous video links in all the
usual places that her temperature will
drop 6° per th000 M of elevation gained
I popped into blender and I I appreciate
that this looks like an absolute chaotic
disaster but trust me when I say this
was organized chaos this was me just
moving the isotherms around in
accordance with the stuff we talked
about in the previous video to get a new
set of isotherms based on the new
topography and from here it was just a
super simple though extremely timec
consuming case of going back and editing
the temperature Maps to factor all this
in so this is the temperature map for
northern hemisphere winter without the
temperature changes that our ice caps
would necessarily bring and this is the
change that the ice caps make so no ice
caps so check down here and here check
in the ice cap zone no ice caps ice
caps no ice
caps ice
caps so in the South here we went from a
bomy bomy z ° C in summer to a bone
chilling -24° in summer at the top of
this ice Dome okay and here we are half
a year later northern hemisphere summer
this time remember here's where our ice
cap regions go and check for the
temperature modifications in these
regions so before ice
caps after ice caps Before ice caps
after ice caps we went from - 48° c to
66° frees and a little bit less with the
ice caps that's a stunning change now I
I promise I I'll stop talking now and
I'll let you go but this sort of thing
just gets me really excited so it's one
more thing before I go peard here in the
summer right is pretty chill it's about
what 15° at the coast here and 0°
definitionally at the edge of the kind
of ice Dome like you could in theory
just like walk that and it would be
pretty chill and lovely now I'm sure
there's like there would be adverse
weather effects with this kind of M
temperature differential but but at
least in theory it's pretty chill and
accessible and then like half a year
later in winter it's just like nope nope
you're not getting anywhere near there
the Zer degree isotherm is like now on
the bay you're just not getting in land
at all well you're -24 within a couple
of 100 kmers of this Bay like that is
just so cool isn't it a chill summer
walk death a thousand ways ah you got to
love
geography and so with that we are
actually like for real done here Tundra
ice caps e- climates done and new
temperature
Maps done next time we're going to leave
our fur coats behind and we're going to
throw on our short shorts and sun hat
and we're going to go figure out the
tropical climates on this world the a
climates so I hope you'll join me for
that thank you for watching thanks to
the patrons for supporting the show and
a final massive thanks to Friend of the
show Ross beo for the continued
Geographic advice right that's me
until next time
Ed grous