# Tropical Climates - Worldbuilder's Log 37

good morning interweb War withs log 37
we are as always continuing to WHL build
our fictional Planet here placeholder
named creac in the last video we dropped
in our Polar climate zones in this video
as promised we're going to head to the
tropics and drop in our tropical
climates But first you know the trill we
got some followup to do first things
first is that I finished off the ice
caps now not ice caps in terms of the
climate zone ice caps in terms of like
the glaciers here is the world with the
ice caps and this is what it was like
beforehand without the ice caps with the
ice caps without the ice caps with the
ice caps very nice next up shout out
Alex Arthur 94 viewer and Patron of the
channel who submitted this baller bit of
artwork here it's basically a size
comparison between the continents on
creac and the continents on earth which
I just love that you took the time to do
this Alex so cool and you can read see
like the scale difference this is bicard
this is ezri they are both they both
have more area than Eurasia and Jenner
is bigger than Canada and D is about
South America so yeah creac he's a thick
boy shout out Alex Arthur 94 cheers man
finally just a quick clarification point
from the previous video it may have
seemed remiss of me not to talk about
precipitation in the previous video
because like without precipitation you
know snow one can't make glaciers and
that's like the defining thing about ice
clap climate zones these dark gray
regions here so just to make it clear
precipitation does not really play a
factor in the placement of ice cap
climate zones you can basically assume
over a long enough period of time there
will be sufficient precipitation to lay
down glaciers in particularly damp areas
the glaciers will get built up really
fast in bone dry places the glaciers may
take you know thousands of years to
build up but they will build up so when
it comes to polar climates we don't
really care about precipitation which is
the antithesis of what we're going to do
in this video speaking of which let's
get
started so tropical climates akaa
climates occur shock horror within the
tropics and they're broken down into
three main subtypes dark blue tropical
rainforest slightly less dark blue
tropical Monsoon bright blue tropical
Savannah now technically tropical
Savannah is broken up into two subtypes
but no one ever cares about that I'm not
going to be talking about it here the
main stick behind the climates is that
they are hot and to varying degrees wet
now I'm pretty sure I don't need to
remind anyone what a tropical rainforest
climate is but here's an example from
Google Earth very hot very wet all year
round thick dense forest that kind of
thing similarly I don't think we need
reminding about what tropical savanas
are but basically they look something
like this still pretty hot but not as
wet so the dense forests kind of give
way to Grasslands uh studded with trees
and the tropical Monsoon it hasn't
really got like a distinctive Vibe at
least not in my mind it's really just a
transition zone between the tropical
rain forests and the tropical savanas
and that's kind of all the background
info we need let's get
drawing so for this video I'm going to
follow World building pastor's
methodology links in the description it
is just ace go check it out so the first
thing we need to do is throw on our
temperature map specifically we want to
be showing both hemispheres winter at
the same time so like this Northern
Hemisphere winter shown at the top
southern hemisphere winter shown at the
bottom we're doing this because
temperature- wise the defining
characteristic of tropical climate zones
a climates is the fact that they never
get colder than 18° C or in other words
this sort of salmon color band here and
redder is our tropical climate zone so
I'm going to work on ezri on this one so
I'm going to zoom in here very good okay
so first thing I want to do is I want to
lay down my tropical rainforests or
sorry tropical rainforest climate zone
it's going to occur in regions that
never get colder than 18° C and that are
very wet year round cuz that's basically
what the rain forest is it's really hot
it's really wet so to find these areas
we're going to need to turn on both of
our precipitation maps at the same time
which can just get a bit hard to see
what's going on so what I've done is
I've taken one of the precipitation maps
and changed its blending mode to
difference now admittedly that is still
a chaotic mess but there is meta to my
madness here right we're dealing with
two colors in our precipitation Maps
right we're dealing with a cyan color
and a blue color therefore when we
overlay things there are four possible
combinations of color overlays right bit
hard to see sometimes where overlap here
so if we take one of them and again put
them onto difference mode what we find
is or what the sort of mathematical
definition of the difference blending
mode is is that if you have two colors
that are the same the difference between
those two colors is zero which the
computer renders as black here same
thing with the cyan two of the same
color laid on top of one another no
difference black but if we have
different colors there will be a
difference and in this particular case
the difference between cyan and blue is
green so going back here I know that any
black regions will have the same
precipitation summer and winter any
green regions would have different
precipitation patterns and any un
modified colors like just this cyan and
blue mean that that that precipitation
only occurs in one season dry some
precipitation so that that kind of makes
it I I think a little bit easier to read
takes a little getting used to but it's
not too bad so now we just need to check
out these black regions we're looking
for very wet year round so we have cyan
here which becomes black so this is cyan
year round no good that's just wet this
chap in here though dark blue turns into
black therefore it must be dark blue
year round that is very wet so I can
turn on my rainforest layer come in here
and
paint over that zone like so now I'm
using warm colors here and not the
canonica blue colors just so there's
contrast between the precipitation map
and the climate zone will change it at
the end okay I'm going to hop into a
time lapse now I'm just going to look
for all the areas in between my two 18°
isotherms that are very wet dark blue in
both seasons and color them in
okay done those red regions are my
rainforests or again rainforest climate
zone next we want to drop in our Monsoon
climate zone our am climate zone and to
do this it is basically it's the
remaining black areas we're looking for
areas that are wet year round so cyan
year round which I'm not mistaken is
this area and this area
done again I'm not looking at these
regions down here cuz they fall outside
of the 18° isotherm
range and finally we're going to lay
down our savanas or again sorry tropical
Savannah climate zone and these are
going to go in regions that are wet in
one season and dry in the other season
so basically anything that remains cyan
now up here for example is a place where
I might need to turn off my blending
mode for a second and just toggle this
on and off yeah I thought so there's a
cyan region here that goes to nothing in
the next season in the other season so
that should also be
Savannah okay tropical climates done
sort of this is like the Baseline
version of these climates but as I'm
sure you've noticed there's a whole
bunch of different precipitation
patterns happening here that will add to
these kind of Baseline
zones so the first thing we're going to
do is we're going to find areas that are
very wet in one season and wet in the
other season which again using our
difference blending mode are these green
areas the difference between blue and
cyan is green difference between wet and
very wet is green we're going to make
these regions either tropical rainforest
or tropical Monsoon depending basic the
closer we are to the Equator the more
likely these green regions are to be
tropical rainforest the further away
they are from the equator and the closer
they are to like dry regions or these
18° isotherms the more likely they are
to be tropical Monsoon there's no kind
of like hard and fast rule here it's
very much a go on Vibes look at Earth
Etc so for me I think this green region
here it's bang on the equator I think
that's definitely a tropical rainforest
now these green regions here they are a
little more interesting on Earth we find
rainforests between the Equator and
about 10 to 15° latitude North and South
so that places this peninsula here
firmly within a kind of like tropical
rainforest Zone but the thing that's
given me pause is that we're getting
really close to the boundary to the 18°
isotherm boundary down here so I'm
wondering just to kind of hedge my bets
maybe we can make these coastal regions
here we can make them Monsoon tropical
Monsoon perhaps that's a good idea or
alternatively it's a peninsula this is
an island surrounded on tree sides by
water tons of moisture in there I think
it can go either way I'm going to make
the peninsula entirely rainforest and
I'm going to leave a bit of monsoon on
this island I think let me know what you
think
okay yeah I think I'm happy with
that cool so now we deal with this
Buckle boy here regions that are very
wet in one season and are dry in the
other season very wet dry we're going to
make this region either tropical
Savannah or tropical Monsoon it's
tropical Savannah if it's Inland or near
any arid areas otherwise it's tropical
Monsoon so expected to show up like near
coasts mountains rainforest firsts that
sort of thing so game plan here is I
reckon the northern half of this Bo here
will be Savannah and remember monsoons
are transition zones so it'll transition
through a monsoon climate to get to our
rainforest climate so let's do that
first and just like before I'm going to
switch to blending mode once again at
the very end just to make sure I got
everything cuz there's a few bits and
Bobs down here that we missed
all right and now we're nearly done all
we want to do now is finesse things a
little bit like if there's anything that
looks kind of weird just manually kind
of correct it I'm looking at you like
Italy Monsoon Italy here I think it's
even though precipitation told me to do
this I think it's a bit weird it's just
this this random like
jotting of the monsoon Zone into the
rainforest Zone I think I'm just going
to paint over that yeah makes sense to
me that feels a whole lot better and the
other thing is you want to make sure you
have a smooth rainforest to Monsoon to
Savannah transition you can see that in
maps of Earth you go very smoothly from
the blue to the medium blue to the light
blue sometimes this gradient can be
quite abrupt sometimes it can be quite
expansive but there always will be that
kind of gradient there so we want to
identify any areas where we're going
from say in this case red to Yellow
without an intermediate orange Zone and
we plop an orang Zone in here the only
place I can immediately see is this
peninsula
here so let's adjust
that everything else looks fine like
obviously along the mountain here as you
gain altitude it's going to transition
from rainforest to Monsoon to Savannah
but that that transition is going to
happen so quickly because this is like
basically this is like the and is like a
sheer wall I'm just not going to bother
really marking it in cuz you won't
really see it it'd be less than a pixel
basically so I'm fine there so I think
everything I think that's all good uh
final final thing is just whack on the
topographic map and make any adjustments
based on the topography all this really
does is basically it neatens up the Zone
a little bit you'll see what it is in
time lapse if there's any additions to
be made at all
okay so look at I may have got a little
bit carried away there I know I said I
wasn't going to do any of the transition
zone stuff along the Eastern edge of
this mountain change but then I just I
got into it and I couldn't stop myself
and here we are the effect is absolutely
minimal I don't know why I did it so for
now that is basically that that is how
you do tropical climate zones ala World
building pasta shout out off air I went
ahead and I did the rest of the regions
on the planet all right that is them
looking pretty sweet now they're not
perfect right like there's a couple of
areas where I'm like M given a bit of
side eye uh but I'm going to leave it
for now and we'll come back to it after
we put in some of our dry climates I'd
like to get a better understanding of
what's around these uh climate zones
before I mck with them anymore the two
regions that immediately kind of spring
to mind for me are this region here this
is a mountain chain there's a rain
shadow effect going on here but we are
also if I bring up my temperature Maps
we are also smack bang on the Equator so
there's always just a background level
of wetness going on you know so I would
not be surprised if this Savannah Zone
actually needed to like stretch across
to like make a contiguous kind of
Savannah band like what we see on Earth
again don't want to planket it now but
that's a thing that might occur and then
the other region is over here in where
we kind of have there's a mountain
running up the middle of this island but
we kind of have two like just dry Parts
here for reasons I don't really know the
precipitation map made sense at the time
but now I'm seeing in climate zones I'm
like maybe not they will likely need to
get colored in again let's leave it
until after we've put in the climate
zones around it oh and and this random
bit of rainforest up near near the
tropics here I I'm not not sure how
pleased I am with that I think that
might need to be erased Etc Etc as with
everything I do it is always a work in
progress anyhow for now tropical climate
zones done next time everyone needs to
make sure they bring adequate hydration
cuz we're off to the deserts I hope
you'll join me for that one so thanks
for watching
and until next
time edar