
# Continental Climates - Worldbuilder's Log 40

Good morning, Interweb. Worldbuilder's Log 40. We're continuing to build our fictional planet here. The placeholder name is CRETAK. Last time we covered some C climates. This time, we're finishing our climate zone map by placing the D climates. Our continental climates. But what is a continental climate? Answer these boys! Now there are about 12 subtypes here. So I really, for time's sake, don't want to get into it. But Tlder continental climates are defined by large temperature fluctuations between summer and winter, and they have four distinct seasons. That's what unifies this crazy group of diversity here. Really quick. All the blue areas here, these are your humid continental climates. All the pink areas are Mediterranean-influenced continental climates. The dark teal-blue here is your sub-polar continental climate and the purple-looking areas here are monsoon-influenced continental climates. As I said, I don't really want to go into details here because there's a lot to do. D climates are hard, so if you want to know more about continental climates, I want to plug Geodiode. Amazing, fantastic, wonderful YouTube channel. They have a playlist called "Secrets of the World Climate series", and it will teach you everything you want to know about each of the climate zones. So go and watch their videos on continental and sub-polar. Links in all the usual places. However, let's get to mapping.

So, just like last time, we wanted to define a general range like the climate range, and our general D climate range and then subdivide it later. By definition, D climates go in regions where winter temperatures are below zero degrees Celsius and summer temperatures exceed ten degrees Celsius, and I won't bother you with an interval here. For Jannar, that region looks like this. Great. Now, for those of you who put all your extra points under observation, you'll notice that the D climate range here overlaps with some of our arid climates. A bit strange, isn't it? Wrong. As you see, some of these arid climates aren't actually arid climates. They're sort of D climates in disguise. And to understand why that is, we'll need to talk about evaporation.

So evaporation is the vaporization of liquid from a surface. Transpiration is the removal of water from plant leaves by evaporation. I'll use the word evaporation from now on. It's the thing we're more familiar with colloquially. There's a point on any planet like Earth, and every region on said planet will receive a certain amount of precipitation. You go to the driest place on Earth. And you'll still receive some precipitation. It won't be a lot of precipitation, but it won't be zero. So using precipitation alone, you can't define arid or non-arid areas, at least outside of tropical regions, you have to balance it with evaporation. Let's say we have two regions here we've identified as arid using our methodology for arid climates in the video. Links in all the usual places. Let's say this region here gets like the minimum amount of precipitation, the blue arrow. But it has like the maximum amount of evaporation. Very little water enters the region, and what does enter it gets immediately sucked out. So it would be safe to say this is an arid region. Basically no moisture. So this would be a B climate. Great. But what about this region here? And this receives the same important level of minimum precipitation. But it also experiences minimum evaporation. Is this an arid region? Is this a B region? Well, not really. Right. Because barely any water reaches the region. But at the same time, it doesn't evaporate very quickly. So it kind of stays on the surface and in the groundwater. So it's kind of non-arid. And thus this B region is actually more like a D region. So we're going to have to take a quick look at a more detailed look at precipitation.

And we have to look at evaporation. And the main thing with evaporation is temperature. If your temperature is low, the evaporation rate won't be very strong. If there's a high temperature, the evaporation rate will increase. Right. Makes sense. If you're boiling a pot of water, you put it on the fire until the water boils. If you just put the stove and put it on a low temperature, the water won't evaporate very quickly at all. So, we're going to need to look for regions of our planet where evaporation is low enough, that our B climate turns into a D climate region. Doing that is a multi-step process. I know the terrible shock of this channel starts with examining temperature. We need to get the annual average temperature for each of these regions, each arid region within our D region. That's step one. For example, we did that last time. But just to recap, for example, let's focus on this small arid region here. We're going to put down a winter temperature map. Take a temperature location. Let's say this location here. And let's say that equals -30. So let's call that -31 in winter. Skyblue for winter. Throwing on a summer map. Get the red for summer. This is my isotherm 12 degrees. This is isotherm 18 degrees, in the middle between them, for example, 15 degrees. Take the average. So -31 plus 15 equals -16. And divided by two equals negative eight. So this is the annual average temperature in this region. So we'll do the same in each region. Again, I won't bother you with the time-lapse here because there's a lot to do. This is the result. The number of checks you do is entirely up to you, and the level of detail you want to go into, as well as how complicated your terrain is.

You know, Jannar is pretty flat for the most part. So I don't need to do that. Many checks. In more mountainous regions, I hedged my bets a bit more. I needed more information. So I have annual average temperatures. Again, this is important because remember higher temperature and increased evaporation; lower temperature, and decreased evaporation. We now just need to know where the cutoff point is between high evaporation and low evaporation. And to do that, we're going to need to take a more detailed look at precipitation. Specifically, we're going to divide precipitation into roughly five degrees from high to minimum. That is, up until this point, we've been working on a precipitation method that's three degrees - dry and humid and very humid. And that has worked well for a large part of the globe, but with regards to D climates, this is not enough. We're going to need to go more detailed. High to minimum. And the basic methodology here is that we're going to target a region. We're going to find the region. And we're going to ask does it receive onshore winds? Then we're going to ask in which season does it receive onshore winds? How far is it from the ocean? And is the region affected by any mountain ranges?

Doing this kind of algorithm will place you or somewhere in this table. Let's just say for the sake of argument, we ran the algorithm and we came out here. This is the important thing. If the region we're looking at, if the annual average temperature is less than what we produce here, then that region is no longer considered a B region. We reclassify it as a D region. Hopefully, that makes sense. Let's do one region together. I'll talk you through while I go, and then I'll do the rest off camera, just because it's the same basic routine every time. So let's go with maybe this section here. So, if this arid region here intersects with the D range. First, does it receive onshore winds and in which season? So we'll put down a summer precipitation map here. And we see that this region here receives onshore winds in summer, and yes, it receives onshore winds in winter. So our output will be in the year-round column. Now when I say onshore here, I really mean onshore. So, it doesn't matter how far from the coast the region you're looking at is, if the winds are onshore, it's considered onshore. It doesn't matter how many mountain ranges the winds cross to reach the region you're looking at, it's considered an onshore region. It doesn't matter how high the mountain ranges are. If it's onshore in any way, it's onshore. Because remember, every part of the planet will get some rain. Oh, and if there are no onshore winds at all for whatever reason, you simply output this value here. That's what this row here refers to. No onshore winds you choose year-round. Minimum fine. Just stick your head up, okay. So we are onshore winds year-round. Great. We move to the right-hand wall column here, the high precipitation column, and we start our journey here. But we continue to ask how far the region we're looking at is from the ocean. And the algorithm here is that for every 1000 kilometers beyond 3000 kilometers from the ocean, we move one column to the left. Okay, if you're 5000 kilometers from the ocean, you'd move one or two columns to the left, and so on. Now, in this region here, I mean, look, we're right up against the ocean. It's impossible that this distance is 3000 kilometers in the direction of the onshore winds in either season. So we stay where we are. We don't move to the left. Next, we ask, do we cross any mountain ranges? And the answer here is yes. We cross these hills here to reach the far-flung regions here. We do this in summer, and we do that in winter, too. For each mountain range you cross, you move one column to the left. So we cross one range of hills. So we'll move one column to the left. And that's in both seasons for us. So we have average summer precipitation and we have average winter precipitation. And that means our output target temperature is this cell here. Now just a quick note. Conditions can change based on the time of year. So let's just say for the sake of argument, instead of having average summer precipitation, we actually had low precipitation. Then what you do is you always take the lowest amount of precipitation. You can take this value in the year-round column, if that makes sense. Now in our case, it doesn't matter because they're the same. So we stick with the average column here.

And we're going to need to make a note of this too. So average summer average winter. So I'll go back to the map. And we'll go to average winter average summer. And that will be important later. So our temperature is five degrees. We've asked the question is our region less than this value. And we see that that's true. We have minus three degrees, minus one, and 4.5 degrees. Everything here is less than its value of five degrees. So it's cold. So evaporation is diminished. So we're not producing an arid region. We're producing a D region, a continental region. So we celebrate it as a continental. And that's the basic stick. Repeat this process for every region in the steppe. The more complicated the region, the more detailed etc. At the end of the day, you should end up with something that looks like this. So there we go. Okay, after taking into account evapotranspiration, I can see that for all of the arid regions within this D range, just this lower southern part will remain arid and everything else will be reclassified as a D climate. And we've got our precipitation patterns here. Now just a quick note. When we say high or average or low, this is not in relation to the highest precipitation one can get on this planet. And this is closer to no precipitation at all. Relatively high to almost nothing. Just so we're clear there. The point is that it may seem like a ridiculous amount of work to do all of this just to determine that as you get closer to the poles, or as you rise in elevation, things get colder, and air flows, and steppes and deserts become D climates.

Why don't we just make a cut? Above a certain elevation or above a certain latitude, B climates cannot exist. Why not do that now? Most of the time this will be the case. There will be some kind of nice, little latitudinal split between all Ds and all Bs, but it's not always that simple. If we look at Greenland, for example, famously quite far into the polar, we'll see that at the very top, we have regions with a dry climate. So, most of the time, the closer you get to the poles, and the higher you rise, the less likely you are to have a B climate. But it's not an axiomatic truth. Sometimes the geography will just conspire to give you these strange, anomalous climates. Doing this algorithm will find those regions for you if they exist in your world. So I think it's worth taking the extra time, but I love it. And with that, we're about to start placing the climates, and I'll do a time-lapse through cutting out this section of the D climate strip. Great. Let's place those climates. Let's start our journey with the Dxd climates. These are the extremely cold winter sub-polar climates. They go to regions within the D climate range where the winter temperature is below that, get ready for -38 degrees Celsius! That's so cold it hurts my soul. Now, fortunately for the denizens of our world, D climates are basically restricted to super continental regions, so we shouldn't really see many of these climates, if any, in our worlds. So, if I click on the winter temperature map here, we'll see that on JANNAR. Like the coldest temperature gets to -31, 32, that kind of thing. Really cold, but not like Dxd cold. And that makes sense, right? Because we don't have super continental regions. Oceanic, subcontinental, continental. That's everything. No super continental region, no DXD. Thank me later, Cretakians. Next, we'll try to explore the Dxa climates. These are our hot summer continental climates. They go within the D range in any region where the summer temperature is higher than 22 degrees Celsius. Something like that. Done.

Next, we venture towards the Dxb climates. Now, just as with the Cxb climates from the previous video - links in the usual places - things get a little tricky, or at least in principle, they get a bit tricky. And that's because the Dxb climate zone, by definition, occurs inside the climate range. In any region where there are four or more months above ten degrees Celsius, if a third of the year or more is above ten degrees Celsius, you've got a Dxb climate. Again, to summarize the previous video, we put down two temperature maps: one for summer, one for winter. So for this to work, we're going to have to pull some strings. And the strings we're going to pull is that we're going to compare the summer temperature to our continentality maps to determine whether four months or more are above ten degrees Celsius or not. And to do that, we'll follow these guidelines. Oceanic region, summer temperature 15 degrees or higher: Dxb. Sub-continental region, summer temperature 16 degrees or higher: Dxb. Continental region, summer temperature 18 degrees or higher: Dxb. And finally super continental region summer temperature 20 degrees or higher: Dxb. So, following these guidelines, let's take a small time-lapse, shall we? Okay. Dxb. Done.

And finally Dxc! Easy-peasy here, just what's left of the D range. If it's not Dxb or Dxa or Dxd, it's horror shock Dxc. Done. We're home. We're almost there. Exciting times. All we have to do is subdivide these regions on the basis of precipitation pattern. Now, since we've taken into account a new methodology for calculating precipitation here, things are a bit more complicated than the previous video. But the worst of it is already over. So what we have to do is to get an envelope from the measurements we made before. Remember we recorded high, high, precise, precise, medium, medium, etcetera. And that's where that comes in. I'll also select all those arid regions or regions that were arid here. And then I'll move over to this lovely table here, which tells me exactly what patterns define exactly what climate regions. For example, this here high in the winter, high precipitation in the winter, high precipitation. In summer it's in the dark band here. So Dubai for instance. So it falls under the column everything else here. Doesn't fit any of these three. Here goes everything else. So this is a more uncouth DF thing again. We are in Dxc band here. So this is DFC. And that's all I'm going to do now is just fill in all of these regions. Done. Great. Nine times out of ten, this will lead to f climates, as in dfx. But every now and then something more interesting will pop up.

And now back to what we were doing in the previous video. Let's celebrate our dsx climates now. These are our summer-dry climates. The Mediterranean-influenced continental climates. If there's precipitation in winter but no precipitation in summer, it's a Dsx climate. So I'll select winter precipitation. All this blue area here, subtract summer precipitation from this selection, and it leaves me all the summer-dry areas. Time-lapse mode engaged. Right. And that's an indecent amount of Mediterranean-influenced. Continental climates. But that's what the precipitation told me to do. Next we're on our way to labeling. Dry winter climates or dwx climates. If there's any kind of precipitation in summer, but nothing in winter, it's Dwx. So we're doing the opposite of the last time. We select summer precipitation and subtract winter precipitation from this selection to leave us all the winter-dry but summer-humid areas. Let's do it! Done. Dry winter climate. Done.

And finally, we've added our dfx climates. And y stands for all year humid. And the cool thing is, just like in the last video, all of the remaining red areas here are all year humid summer. There's a little part of the troublesome part here. And that's a mistake on my part. This should be all year humid. More interactive. Right, D climates implemented! And what that means is that the whole planet has been done. Because I, as always, off camera, finished the rest of the world. So this is where we've gotten to at the beginning of the video. And this is our complete climate map. Beginning of the video. Complete map. Very nice. Super excited. Oh, now, when we talk about the eroding deserts, we note that our deserts were surrounded by steppe regions. And then when I cut stuff out using our D climate strip, that broke up that steppe region. Make sure that happens to you, and return you to the steppe region according to the B climate video - links in the usual places. So it looks a little bit like this. This is after the D climate has been merged, and this is with the new modified steppe region inserted. It's pleasing. Now, you can just leave it here completely and call it a day and be done with climate things. But if you want extra credit, you can do some incredibly quick checks. Now I say a lie actually. Incredibly quick are the wrong words to use there. They're not quick, they're super boring. But ultimately, the product will ultimately be a little bit more robust. So let's do some checks. So, it's worth noting that not every type of climate region can neighbor any other type of climate region. Right? Makes sense. It would be impossible for a tundra climate to be adjacent to a rainforest climate. That makes no sense, does it? And there would be some climate regions in between to fill that gap, perhaps many climate regions in between.

So this is what we're going to cover kind of in this kind of checker step, this final checker step, we're going to go through our different climate regions and go, okay, can this climate region here border this climate region here? If the answer is yes, great. If not, can I put something in between now, as I said, this takes forever. So I'll give you an overview, and show you one example. And then I'll complete it off camera and we can compare and contrast. For example, if we go into this region here. We have Cfb. The Cfb climate region. An oceanic climate bordering a warm summer continental climate in Germany. Can we do that? Well, fortunately, here's a list of all the D climate regions. And here's a list of all the climate regions these climate regions can touch. So, if you have a Dfb climate like here, you just check the list and go, is there a Cfb written here? Yes, there is a Cfb, so Dfb and Cfb may touch fine. Excellent! Most of the time, this procedure tries to be as realistic as possible. Most of the time, the climate regions you've drawn will be perfectly compatible. But often you might just need that. And I chose this region specifically because if we look up here, we have Cfb adjacent to Dfc. We have an oceanic climate adjacent to a sub-polar continental climate. Does this work? Let's check our DFC range here. Scroll through and you'll see there's no mention of Cfb. So we don't find Cfb climates adjacent to Dfc climates. So we're going to have to manage some sort of transitional climate regions. Now, which ones largely depends on studying what the Earth does and what climate regions are available in the neighboring area. So we have Dfb knocking here. And I wonder, can I extend this to create a realistic bridge? We know that Cfb and Dfb can touch. We just check that. Can Dfb and Dfc touch? Dfb? DFC, they can touch. So we can use this as a transitional region and expand it and use it as a transitional region to get a more realistic sort of climate layout.

And you can see this happening on Earth clearly. This is everyone's favorite Scandinavian state, Denmark. That's a joke. I know it's Norway. Don't look at me. If we look south here, we have a Cfb climate region. Oceanic leading to warm continental leading to sub-polar. Now on the coastal fringes, something slightly different is happening, but anyway in the inland, this is the transition we see time and time again. Let's check Western Canada. It's a bit hard to see. I can't zoom in anymore. I might zoom in post a bit more, but in the valleys here you'll see that you have Cfb in the lowlands. Then we move to this blue zone, the warm summer continental region, and we move to the teal blue, the sub-polar region. So there are natural precedents. And we have this climate all over the place. So let's fill it in. Something like this. If this seems like you've gone back, you'll do the check and check every climate region. Not just in the D range. So screenshot at the ready, this is what all the A climates can touch. This is what all the B climates can touch. Here's what all the C climates can touch. Your Ex. Your Es. Oh, and one more thing! Sometimes, these transitional regions might be so small that they don't actually show up on a worldmap. So, you have a little bit of wiggle room there, especially in areas with high elevations. Don't feel like you have to do all of this checking. I would say definitely for lowlands, extra credit for highlands. Okay. I'll do all this checking. I'll also sort out some of this split crap happening here. I'll do all that off camera because watching it is super boring. Through the magic of YouTube editing, JANNAR, its final state, looks like this. Hopefully a little bit more organic. And here's before, and here's after. There wasn't much that I could change concerning the checks. Most of this was just making, things look sort of organic, and that's everything. Climate regions. Completely done. It's time for me to finally get some sleep. As always, folks. Thank you so much for watching these climate videos. I hope you're enjoying them. I hope you've all been enjoying them. I want to give a big shout-out again to resident geography expert Rossbaygeo for helping develop this methodology. And I think the results layer. So next time we'll do something specific relating to the climate region. So stay tuned to find out what that is. I wish you great folks. And until next time... Edgar out!
