# Rivers - Worldbuilder's Log 41

Good morning, Interweb. Worldbuilder's Log 41. We are, as always, continuing to build our fictional planet here, placeholder name CRETAK. Last time, we finished our climate regions. This time, we're going to look at rivers. We'll take a map that looks like this and transform it into something that looks like this. This is a bit hard to see. Hold on. There we go. But before we start our river adventures, we have to do some follow-up.

So, Nikolai from Worldbuilding Pasta is the best worldbuilding blog on the internet. No line. You have to go check it out. Links in all the usual places - Nikolai went ahead and simulated CRETAK's climate using ExoPlaSim. This software he uses to simulate climate. I thought I'd just flash it on screen a little bit, talk about it, compare and contrast, and that kind of thing. Caveats here. ExoPlaSim does some strange things. For example, in tropical regions - especially in tropical regions - coastal and island areas tend to model as dry. Western coasts tend to be a bit cool. Eastern coasts tend to be a bit warm. And in general, the planet's average temperature in the simulation is 16 degrees Celsius. And that means, for example, two degrees Celsius from where it should be, but it's close enough that it falls within the margin of error, so we're still kind of making comparisons. So, we just have to keep these caveats in mind while comparing, and look, I don't think we did too terribly. Obviously, there will be differences between what a human can do and what a computer can do. But I think we're largely in the ballpark, which is kind of great.

The most important things for me are the fact that the computer doesn't want to give DEGRA a desert. I find that interesting. And it also seems like it doesn't want to give much credit to the Gulf Stream effect here. Like, if you notice, I've run a bunch of high temperatures along the coast here. The rationale for that is that I said there's a kind of strong Gulf Stream effect; the computer says no. Again, caveat: western coasts tend to be a bit cool, but like the computer wants to run tundra all the way along. Again, really interesting. Now, I'm not going to change my map based on this because again, we're just working on different intuitions, me and the computer. But the one small modification I do want to make, which is more based on the comments and feedback I got in previous videos, is this little highland area here in DEGRA. A lot of people point out that this is probably too dry, like a strong hit on the equator. Steppe directly on the equator. Probably not a good idea. And the computer seems to agree with this. It doesn't have steppe regions in this kind of highland here. And I also did some comparison and contrast with similar elevations on Earth at similar latitudes and yeah, no steppes. So I'm going to bite the bullet and erase those steppes. I've turned them into savanna, and then we'll move on to rivers.

Great. For rivers, I'm going to follow Rivers and Wetlands by the wonderful Madeleine James. Links in all the usual places. We highly recommend this guide. It's super easy to follow, it's fantastic. Please go check out Madeleine's stuff. So, to begin with, we're going to take a continent. I'm going to pick EZRI in this video and I'm going to divide it up into drainage basins by marking my drainage divides.

So, a drainage basin is basically an area where all the water flows into the basin and exits through a single point. And drainage divides basically mark out drainage basins. On one side of the divide, water flows into one basin, and on the other side of the divide, water flows into a different basin. Water flows in two opposite directions. So, to find where your drainage divides are, you just trace along your higher elevation areas. Your hills, your hills, your mountain ranges until you create a closed shape or meet the sea.

For example, if we take this mountain range here, and if I was working in this local section, I'm pretty confident that the highest points run along this kind of line of hills here and I can see the highest kind of local points, highest adjacent points trace here across this high part here, across this small mountain range. And then maybe I'd try to see through this headland. Something like this. Water will flow on this side into this basin. Water will flow on this side into this basin. So, if we do the same thing again on the other side, let's assume the highest points run along the central hill line. Run it from here, and connect it to the next mountain range. All the way down and out, for example, to the ocean via this headland. Another drainage divide. Water flows in this direction on this side. And then the barrier on the other side. And hey, we've created a drainage basin. All the water is going to flow in here, but it's going to flow out to this part of the ocean here. And this kind of drainage basin that drains to the ocean is called an exorheic basin. Exo meaning external; water flows out. In about 80% of cases, our drainage basins will be exorheic. But not always. If we jump to the central plateau in EZRI here, and if I did the same thing, you just follow all the adjacent highest parts along a mountainous, hilly, etc., creating our drainage divides, we find that a very different structure appears. Something like this. We get a basin that doesn't drain to the sea. And this is called an endorheic basin. Endo, internal; doesn't drain to the sea. We'll talk about what happens with endorheic basins in a bit. But for now, I'm just going to go ahead and divide EZRI this way. Every time I find an endorheic basin, I'm going to put an X mark to remind myself what's going on.

Time-lapse. Done. Oh, and sorry. I'll pick kind of main basins, but to my knowledge, I might get into the weeds a bit and start carving out smaller basins. We'll just see. The level of detail is entirely up to you.

Right. Drainage basins. Done. This step is a good opportunity to redo a little bit of the terrain if you want to. I just want to beat on this pass and deal with it here. I think I'm going to close this up. Two reasons. It makes this basin more... basin-y... no gap in the basin. I also think, more importantly kind of, I like the idea of giving, like one access point to the far east of EZRI. It's kind of like the Panama isthmus. Like one choke point. This is kind of neat. So I'm going to try and I'm going to fill in this buoy.

So my first job here is for each basin, and specifically for each exorheic basin. So, those that don't have an X mark, we'll leave for later. I want to go in and I want to mark the main river for this basin as like the trunk river for the basin. Let's say, for example, in this basin here, I'll locate the first order main river through the cross-reference of my terrain maps, precipitation, and climate regions.

So for terrain, I want to look for high elevation areas for this river to start in. So we're looking at this mountain range here and here. Then I want to add my precipitation maps, and I want to find the most all-year-humid area. So it seems to be very humid in summer along this mountain range. A bit less humid here. In winter, precipitation retreats to the lowlands. So it seems like somewhere in this mountain range is probably where my main river is going to start, where its headwaters will be. And finally, we should check the climate region map and note the fact that we pass through continental and temperate climates.

And taking all of that into consideration, I'm going to draw a river from this mountain to this outlet here. Main things to remember here. Water: always flows downhill. Never uphill. Rivers: never bifurcate. And the river will always take the path of least resistance. Now we are worldbuilders, so we can always modify terrain if necessary, but for the most part, I want to try to follow my terrain, taking into account three rules and get the river to the sea. So I'll say I'll start from here and I'll try to find my valleys and go through them. Very simple. Rinse and repeat for each Exorheic basin.

You also want to kind of bias towards longer rivers. So, in this basin, for example, we see that we have year-round precipitation along this kind of mountain where there's only kind of heavy winter precipitation in these mountains. I've decided to declare that there's more precipitation happening here as an average throughout the year, just to get a longer river. So, there's a lot of flexibility and artistic license you can take during this river step. Sorry. Me again. More stuff to explain. I have a really bad habit of cutting off precipitation at the thousand meter mark. I really need to not do that next time. So this entire basin appears to be dry in the highlands. Actually, this precipitation would absolutely continue up into the hills and we can eke out of it, etc. So I've chosen to start the main river in these highlands here. This is how I compensate for being too conservative with precipitation since many, many moons ago.

Right. Me again. Again. Sorry. This basin here. Primarily arid. Remember that all regions get a certain amount of precipitation. River starts in the steppe here. So what I'm going to do, or what I did, is I narrow this river. Turns out the flow isn't strong. In this area here. This basin basically doesn't get precipitation. It's like all desert. And so I've chosen to put it as a dashed line. Either this river is highly intermittent. And only flows on the rare occasions when some precipitation falls in this basin. Or it's an old dried-up river. I won't make that distinction now. I'll just note it. I can edit it later.

Again, don't be afraid to make the terrain respect you if it produces a more aesthetic form. In these very long coastal basins, like Andean mountain ranges. Don't be afraid to put two first order rivers. One isn't enough for something long and skinny.

So two things here in east EZRI basin. Number one. This basin here doesn't get precipitation. At least not in the highlands. And it's like all deserts near where I place the headwaters. In order to get more moisture into this basin. Here, I'm declaring that there are gaps in this Andean mountain range, which is reflected in the terrain that allow water to pass through and enter this basin. So, the headwaters of this river here are temperate. On this side of the mountain range, we've got year-round precipitation, so it's strong enough to keep this stream flowing through the desert all year. And the other thing, again, in this larger basin, there's no precipitation in the highlands. So I'm relying on meltwater. We get very cold in the winter. Lots of snow. And in the summer the temperature is between zero and six degrees, I think. Minus six... zero... plus 6. Yeah, between zero and the size degree. And that's enough to melt the snow. And then to feed this river. Oh, and in the polar regions or in the polar climates, I'm reducing the river flow again to kind of hint at lower flow.

Right. Primary rivers, and exorheic basins. Done. Before we move on to endorheic basins. Basins that don't drain to the sea. There are two things to note. First: this river here is bananas. Like it's hyper-Nile. It might literally be the longest river I've ever drawn. I've marked it as perennial, not ephemeral or intermittent, because I think I can make it perennial. But that's later in the video. The other thing hopefully obvious is that since we have seasonal precipitation maps, we can trace river flow by season. For example, this river here, it receives precipitation in summer. So it flows stronger in summer. Summer floods probably occur and no floods in winter. Weaker flow. Whereas if we compare it to the rivers along this coastline here, they get year-round precipitation. And thus the river flows at a constant rate. And obviously, this has deep and lasting implications for any cultures you might choose to settle these rivers. So just fun stuff. Anyway, endorheic basins. Let's go.

So the basic idea here is that we want, like Asphel, to have no more than 20% of our basins be endorheic. So I'll be thinking about trying to get rid of some of these endoreic basins, basically converting them to exorheic basins. I think the prime candidate here is maybe this upper plateau section, for no other reason than the precipitation or snowmelt that's collecting here. I'd like to poke a hole in this lip here, and bring all of that moisture into this basin. So just maximize the amount of moisture here. So, yeah, all this runoff here is basically going to come down through this channel and feed into this basin, creating kind of a hyper basin here. So we're going to talk about this character in the second.

These three basins here, these three basins I think I'm going to keep them endorheic, which means water is going to collect in the basin to form one or more inland lakes. So these are like salt lakes, like the Caspian Sea, where a bunch of water flows in but no water flows out. And it only escapes through evaporation. Now in these two locations, we're in the far north. And thus, evaporation is going to be diminished as if we were in a polar climate. But the terrain is so steep here that I think there's plenty of room to collect a bunch of small lakes all over the place. I think maybe the same thing here. So, I'm going to go ahead and draft in a few lakes.

Great. Something like this.

And finally, the big boy. So there are, like, a billion things we could do with this. Like idea number one, we could say that this, in fact, isn't endorheic. It's exorheic. It drains into this basin here and eventually into the sea because we're so far from the pole, minimum evaporation. And we've got buckets of moisture. So tons of water enters the system, and doesn't evaporate very quickly. So we could expect this inland sea to overflow and join this basin here. That would be like scenario number one. Now there could be another idea, yes, this lake here fills up very quickly given all the moisture in the area and snowmelt. But as it fills up, its surface area increases. And so evaporation would increase because of the increased surface area. So we can see that it's reached some kind of equilibrium and thus say, you know, with a certain degree of confidence that this entire basin here is Endorheic. It's like a giant Caspian sea. In fact, remember that this is the equivalent of twice the size of the Caspian sea. So that's idea number two. Idea number three, and perhaps this is the coolest idea, is that we just have oscillation. Right. So we're not in equilibrium. This lake periodically overflows, but we're showing the world at a period of time where it's not overflowing, but maybe filled right to the brim. I think this is the most interesting because we keep a fairly large basin. And perhaps we could also mark a bunch of similar valley formations, maybe here to indicate that similar structures were formed, the last time this overflowed. And the terrain also kind of hints at this. We've got this highly dissected terrain. So I think that's perhaps what I would ultimately do. Idea number four. Just... it's not a really useful idea really, but I'll throw it out there. You could have made it technically an encryic basin. In that, kind of like karst landscapes. This actually does drain to the sea, but it's not obvious. Like the river starts here. There's kind of an underwater exit point and it appears here. Now I know how everyone's going to be. Oh my God, that's grade. I'm not sure about doing that on a world map scale, and I'm not sure about doing that when I don't know what's happening to the rocks in the area. This is just a fun idea. It doesn't really apply but I like the oscillating lake and we're in a non-flooding period, so I'll do that.

I'll do a small valley formation here. Time-lapse mode engaged.

Okay. Something like this. Now, I'm trying to keep the valley so you can't see it on the world map. Kind of like the Grand Canyon in real life. And I've kept it along the Grand Canyon. Like, the main part here is a few hundred kilometers long. This is super neat. Just, I think there's still one more main river, and then we move on to the next phase.

Oh, but I've also tried to keep it to the depth of the Grand Canyon. I'm basically using the Grand Canyon as a model here.

Okay, these are all our primary first-order rivers. Next, what we're going to do is add second-order rivers and third-order rivers in each basin. So your second-order rivers are tributaries to your main river. And your third-order rivers are tributaries to your tributaries. And feel free, of course, to add more rivers around the place, just kind of flesh it out.

The general rule in your tropical and temperate regions is that you want to have a greater river density than in your continental regions, which in turn should have a greater river density than your polar regions. Basically, what you're looking for is kind of a tapering from the equator to the pole. With rivers becoming less and less. There's nothing to this. It's the same mapping process as in your primary rivers. So sit back. Relax. Enjoy. Just remember the basic rules. Rivers flow downhill. They will take the easiest route and your rivers will never bifurcate. Rivers come together and never split. And if you want to modify the terrain to achieve cool things.

Okay, rivers. EZRI. Done. Turns out we can actually maintain the desert giganto river here by punching a hole in the Andean mountain range. Or many holes in the Andean world of range. And take some of this moisture from the humid coastline and bring it into the middle of the desert. Very cool. Quick note about intermittent rivers. I'm connecting them all to a stem river. However, odds are the water won't ever flow all the way to the stem river. This is just a representation of the maximum path. They've disappeared before the trunk river in most cases, if not all. Right? Finally, the last thing I want to do is to talk about glacial lakes. But it's 5 pm here. It's dinner time for me, so I'll get back to you tomorrow. Hello, I am the afternoon. It is the next day. Edgar here. Dinner was very nice. Thanks for asking. What were we doing? Oh yes. We were going to put in some glacial lakes.

So, CRETAK, here, has some ice cover, right? There are some glaciers ongoing. However, I can't call this the Ice Age. So I think at some point in the past, this ice was far out in the direction of the pole. Glacial lakes form as a result of this ice. Basically, all the ice cuts out depressions in the ground. Then as the glaciers retreat, these depressions are exposed. They're filled with meltwater. Ya presto. Glacial lakes. Great. So what we're going to do is we're going to roughly draw where we think the extent of ice was during the last glacial maximum and take it from there. So I'm feeling something a bit like this.

Okay. Great. This line here represents the maximum extent of the ice. It's kind of the terminal line. Now how I arrived at this was largely like just a gut feeling guess. But there was a little bit of thinking behind it. First thing is that the higher the elevation, the colder it is, the more you push the line towards the equator as well, the more you went to the east coast, the more you push the line toward the equator. You'll notice it's closer to the equator here than it is here. Remember that there's a hyper continental region running here. And the reason for that, and the other thing is that I was careful not to go below 40 degrees. In fact, I stayed away from the 40 degree - latitude - line because if you went too far towards the equator, the planet would be so cold that you'd kind of trigger like a runaway snowball effect on Earth, which we don't want.

So we're going to find some glacial lakes within this region. According to Madeleine, we're looking for humid or more humid areas. Now we're using a slightly different model for precipitation than Madeleine, but I think they should be interoperable. So, maybe we're also looking for a good location between mountain ranges or in or near the headwaters of the river we've already drawn.

So we want to take these three things into account and we'll see can we find any interesting lakes. Time-lapse mode. Done.

Okay, I think that's good. I've played a bit fast and loose with Madeleine's rules here, like these two lakes are in a drier area. But I really wanted to kind of showcase or, like, indicate that at some point, there was a terminal line running here, so I wanted, like, a line of lakes. I've also included, like recent meltwater lakes here on the margins of our glacial caps.

Same jazz here. We've got like a line of these glacial lakes, which is kind of a hint at the world's history. I didn't do more because I think actually, again, if we think in terms of the terminal line, if we had a terminal line running here, you know, it would run through this inland sea. So perhaps if this entire inland sea was fully drained, you'd see small lakes or large glacial lakes forming here. So I think that's super neat. And I think this is also done. Actually, sorry, just to clarify, obviously there would be a lot more lakes in this world. Like, every single one of these kinds of densely flowing rivers would have like a bagillion lakes along its course. We're not showing them here. I'm just showing the kind of big lakes of the world. Implicitly, there's a lot more, and obviously.

Same thing with the rivers. Like implicitly, there would be a bunch more rivers than are shown here. There's only so much time I can devote to rivers. Anyway, this is what we worked through in this video. Off camera, I've mapped the rest of the world and now it looks like this. As you can see, we've got some cool glacial lakes here. We've got here an internal glacial rim lake, which I think is super neat. I dare say it, it looks pretty delicious here without the drainage barrier. And with that rivers are done. Thank you very much for watching. Hope you enjoyed. Hope you'll join me next time for more worldbuilding. Big love to you all. Big love to patrons. Big love to Ross Bay Geo for their continued geographical advice and consultation. Definitely love it! Until next time. Edgar out!