
# Fog, Thunderstorms, Tornadoes, Auroras - Worldbuilder's Log 42

Good morning, Interweb. Worldbuilder's Log 42. We are, as always, continuing to build our fictional planet here. Placeholder name CRETAK. Last time we looked at rivers, this time we'll look at weather, specifically fog and thunderstorms, and if we have time, auroras. Let's get worldbuilding. Again, I'll be following, expanding on, and adapting the absolutely fantastic worldbuilding guide created by Madeleine James. Links in all the usual places for this. You have to go check out her stuff. So let's start with fog. This will be very quick because I won't do it on camera. I have nothing to add to Madeleine's method here. It is, as far as I'm concerned, pretty much perfect. So all you have to do is follow her method literally, step by step, and you'll end up with something that looks a bit like this.

The blue here represents coasts that are foggier during the northern hemisphere winter. Pink, northern hemisphere summer. Purple, year-round. And Madeleine's method has some lovely details. For example, for instance, this coast here inland we have year-round fog. But during the northern hemisphere summer, the fog is also a bit out to sea. Year-round fog on the coast. Northern hemisphere winter, fog in the sea. Neat. Let's do some thunderstorms. So I'm going to map thunderstorms on camera, because I have something to add to Madeleine's method. We're going to need two maps here. One for the northern hemisphere summer, and one for the northern hemisphere winter. Let's focus on northern hemisphere summer in this video. The first thing Madeleine asks us to do is to identify different influence zones to help us find where thunderstorms will go.

Broad strokes. I've followed her method, but with some modifications. So for my first influence zone, I struck the northern hemisphere summer temperature map and selected all areas that were 18 degrees Celsius or warmer and which weren't arid or polar. And this selection looked somewhat like this. The reason we do this is that thunderstorms like themselves in some warm conditions, but they don't occur frequently in deserts or polar climates. This is influence zone one. Influence zone two I took the same selection and deleted from it anything I considered not a large land mass. So, basically, like all these island chains here, etc. This looks a bit like this. The reason we make this particular selection is that the larger the land mass, the more it can heat up. The more thermal convection in the area, the more likely we are to get thunderstorms. That influence zone number two. For influence zone, number three, I went on my pressure maps again northern hemisphere summer, and I highlighted all areas of low pressure. Basically everything that's not this kind of orange color or swampy-green kind of color which looks like this. Oh, and again, also, I took out the deserts and I took out the polar climates. And for the final influence zone, I highlighted the windward side of kind of major mountain ranges. And this looks something like this. And again, I deleted any selections that fell in deserts or polar regions. And the final condition, as Madeleine says, is to highlight whether your winds are cold or warm or not. So, basically, if these winds come from a polar direction, they would be classified as cold. And if they came from an equatorial direction, they would be classified as warm. And this looks a bit like this. With all these prerequisites in place, we have all the factors necessary to be able to determine where our thunderstorm regions are.

Right. So, we're going to go ahead and create a five-level scale here to map thunderstorm probabilities, which is low to none, basic, moderate, severe and tornadic. Now these labels here, or these levels, here are very vague by design. And that's a good thing. But being me, let's make things a bit more realistic. And to do this, we're going to compare the results of Madeleine's method with Earth maps. So this chapter here comes from NASA. This is a map of lightning activity on Earth. The average annual lightning activity. The darker or redder the area, the higher the lightning activity. The cooler the area, the more cyan and purplish the area, the lower the lightning activity. Shout out to Lake Maracaibo here. My dude! Now by comparing Madeleine's maps and Earth maps, we can assign numbers to these levels. So, we can say that low to none is roughly less than one lightning flash per square kilometer annually. Basic is from one to five. Moderate from 5 to 15. Severe 15 plus. And tornadic is just a separate bag of problems. We'll talk about that in a bit. With our key designed and color palette chosen, we can start mapping these areas and we'll start with basic. And that means 1 to 5 lightning flashes per square kilometer per year. Basic is super easy. All we have to do is select all of our influence zones and color them in.

So in Photoshop, you can click on the thumbnail of the layer to select said layer. This is our 18 degree plus area. Then I can control or command click on each subsequent thumbnail to add that to the selection. So let's add our large landmass influence zone, our low pressure influence zone, and our windward side of mountains influence zone. With all four of these items on, we'll select our basic layer, pick the correct color, and then hit shift backspace to fill that in. That's literally everything. Basic done. Now moderate. It's a bit more complicated, but nothing terribly serious. We'll just turn off the basic here for one second. I'll bring up the arrows and let's pick, for example, our first influence zone, our warm areas, 18 degree plus. For each of our influence zones, anytime we have red arrows, warm and humid winds blowing on the area, we classify it as moderate. So, for example, if I zoom in on this area here, you can see the selection here with the marching ants or not, as the case may be, it's very difficult to see. I do apologize about that, but we have a bunch of red arrows coming to this area, so we consider it moderate. Something like this. Rinse and repeat across the world for each of our four influence zones. Time-lapse mode engaged.

Right. Gone through all the influence zones. That should be the moderate layer. And here's what we've got so far. Very nice. Final layer. Severe. So, for the severe, we have our four influence zones, well, we have our 18 degree plus warm area our large landmass and our low pressure area and our windward side of mountains. Anywhere that three or more of these influences act on an area, at the same time, we mark that place as severe. 15 plus lightning flashes per square kilometer per year. So, here are all the possible combinations of three or more of these factors. It's simply a case of selecting and then coloring. It's very straightforward. So, if we look at the first influence here, all four influences, we go into Photoshop. We're going to start with our warm layer, 18 degrees plus, and then click command to make this selection. Then the next layer up, large landmass layer. Right click the thumbnail and select Intersect Transparency Mask. This will highlight only the areas subject to the warm influence zone and the large landmass influence zone. Then we go up to low pressure. Right click the thumbnail. Intersect Transparency Mask. Go up to windward side of mountains. Right click the thumbnail. Intersect Transparency Mask. And now we have all the areas selected where all four influences zones play a role. We pick our severe color and then go to the severe layer. Shift backspace to fill that in. Boom! Rinse and repeat for the other combinations.

Okay. Severe done. And now we can fill in all the remaining landmasses with low or none, which is less than one lightning flash per square kilometer per year. Beautiful. That's basically thunderstorms done. All we've got to do now is make some small refinements to make this map look a bit more like the Earth maps. So first things first. Do you see how we got a bunch of severe and moderate areas very far towards the pole? I don't think we'd expect to see this if we look at this map here. Moderate / severe is basically the kind of dark orange to red to black area. Noted that it's largely tropical areas, except for the States here. So what I'm going to do here is that we're going to use the 18° isotherm to cull things. So I'm going to bring up my temperature map. And I'm going to select all areas that are 18 degrees Celsius or cooler. Pro tip here, we press W on the keyboard to bring up the magic wand tool. Go up to the top here, and unselect contiguous, and then if you click on the color, it will select all of that color anywhere on the canvas. Very helpful here. So I'm going to select all the relevant colors such that everything cooler than 18 degrees Celsius is selected. I'll go back to our thunderstorm map, go to the moderate layer then hit the layer mask icon and then hit Command or Control i to invert it. And you'll see that the moderate areas have been restricted within the 18 degree isotherm, or 18 degrees or warmer. So here's before and there's after. Alt click and drag the layer mask to the severe. So we can also restrict the severe as well. And the next thing is rain shadows. So note that almost anytime we have a large mountain range, you can get large thunderstorms on one side. But in the rain shadow, you won't get any at all. So I'm going to simulate that here. I'm going to locate all the high mountain ranges, and I'm going to reduce any of these areas by one step in the rain shadows of those mountain ranges. So we come to here and we put up our wind map. We see that the winds are coming this way. This is the windward side of the mountain range. Here on the other side is the rain shadow. It's moderate. So we'll erase that down to basic. This part is severe. So we'll erase that back down to the moderate level. That's the basic stick. Rinse and repeat. Whole map. Time-lapse mode engaged.

That's rain shadows. Done. That took a not insignificant amount of time, but I think it looks good. Now, technically, what I should do now is I should go and say, for example, we have a basic area here then severe. We should really create a transitional area through moderate. I might do that off camera because it's literally, you know, drawing colors between other colors, and there's not a lot to talk about you know. Thunderstorms, done. Let's talk tornadoes.

Right. For tornadoes, we're going to try to find tornado alleys. These are the regions on our planet where tornadoes are at their most. Frequency of tornadoes is at its highest. This is the same caveat as thunderstorms. Every part of the planet can experience tornadoes. Just as in my life, I've experienced two tornadoes in Ireland. Not personally, but they happened in Ireland. And Ireland doesn't even register in terms of global tornado frequency. So just look for the highest concentrations. And these will mostly happen between latitudes 30 and 50 degrees north and south. You can go more towards the equator if you want, see China, but you probably don't want to go much further towards the pole. They will particularly happen in regions where cool, dry air is coming over a mountain range like, for example, the Rockies meeting warm humid air at the base of the mountains. Whole bunch of mixing. Tornado occurs. No craig to any person. So we're on our way to do that here. Also, only map tornados in the summer hemisphere, because again, they'll be at their strongest when tornado alleys are really "alleys", you know. So let's see what we can do here. I'm just going to set up a few layers. There we go. We've got our wind layer. And I've just taken the severe layer and dropped the opacity a little bit. Okay, let's see can we find a few locations right away, my eye is drawn to this area of EZRI, here. We've got flat plains. Well, there's relatively flat plains happening here. We've got cool air coming from over this giant plateau here. The cool air on top meets the warm air below here. We'll say there's a lot of moisture due to the winds coming from the Gulf of EZRI here. So I think this is a bit of a good tornado location. So I'm going to draw a little dot here, let's say one tornado alley in this area. Done. Now, by all accounts, you probably wouldn't get a whole bunch of action in the middle of this low pressure zone, but we can easily see movement in the place could be more here, for example. So I don't have a problem with this. Similarly, here in JANNAR, we've got a somewhat similar situation. We've got a bunch of air now, even though we've marked it as warm here. On second thought, I don't think this is very warm. Air comes from the polar direction down over the fractured valley here. The cool air meets on top, at least partially, the air that's moving kind of sideways. So that would be warmer air than what's coming here. So I think we could have a smaller tornado alley happening here. And despite the terrain being a bit lumpy and rugged, the elevation changes are so slight here that it forms a perfectly fine plain. So I'll say. Maybe something small like this. And that's basically it. I can't see any other good tornado candidates. Again, just looking at the summer hemisphere. Right. And that is our complete thunderstorm and tornado map. As always off camera, I went ahead and did the other season. So, this is the northern hemisphere summer and this is the northern hemisphere winter. Summer. Winter. Summer. Winter. Here are they side by side. Neat. I've been recording all day. Do I have time for auroras? Do I want to do auroras? Yes, let's, let's do some auroras.

Right. Auroras. The Northern or Southern Lights. You know what these are? I'm not going to explain. Madeleine's method here is chef's kiss. Simple and to the point. Mark rings between 60 and 70 degrees north and south in both hemispheres. And in these areas, you'll get frequent Northern and Southern Lights. Deadly. But we can push this a little bit further. So, as Madeleine noted, the Northern and Southern Lights happen in what's called the auroral oval. This buoy here, is basically a donut-shaped region around the geomagnetic poles - and this is important - where the probability of seeing aurora increases the closer you get to the pole and decreases the further away from it you get. You can divide the auroral oval into three regions, I think, the kind of basic auroral oval where you'll see very frequent and very frequent Northern and Southern Lights. The sub-auroral oval. My God, that's so hard to say quickly. Here, the probability of seeing aurora decreases. Then the final area, the solar storm area where you'll only see aurora on very rare occasions when the sun experiences a major solar storm. So remember, the important thing is that the oval is centered on the geomagnetic pole, not on the rotational axis. So we have the freedom to place this auroral region anywhere we want depending on the kind of continent or continents we want to give aurora to. So first thing is where should we place our geomagnetic pole? Now, I don't know that much about this. So tell me somebody in the comments, but as far as I can see, we have the freedom to place the geomagnetic poles anywhere we want. But if you want to avoid any kind of unexpected complications, perhaps we should keep it close to where it is on Earth. So, as here, we have the North Pole, the geographic North Pole, at 10 degrees latitude. We have the geomagnetic pole. So, as long as we're in this kind of ballpark, we can't go too wrong. At least I don't think so.

And the second thing to note here is that according to Wikipedia, the auroral region is between 10 and 20 degrees from the geomagnetic pole and is usually between 3 to 6 degrees wide in terms of latitude. Now, clearly we don't have to use these exact numbers. We can play a little bit. So let's go to GPlates and do some mapping. So, for the first time ever, in the many years I've been looking at GPlates, I'm going to use this tool called the small circle creation tool. Click up on the right here call up select center and radius click on this boy. And now we'll center the circle. So, we'll basically pick the geomagnetic North Pole. So I'm going to make up some numbers here. So something within ten degrees of the actual rotational axis which would be 90 degrees let's say 82.8 something like that. Latitude. And longitude, again could be any random number. And what I'll do next is I'll pick multiple radii because we want to draw those multiple regions. We'll start at about 10 degrees from the geomagnetic pole. And let's say, for the sake of argument, that each range within our auroral region lies at 10 degree latitude. So we want three regions. So, we want to get to 40 degrees in steps of 10 degrees. And if we preview, we should be able to see a nice auroral band. So this first inner ring would be the auroral oval and then the sub-auroral region and then the solar storm area. And then we can okay and then start to create the features. Give it a plate ID let's say one. Give it a name. The Northern Auroral Region. Distant past. Distant future. None of this actually matters. Next. And I'll put it in my aurora folder. Creates. Boom. Done. So that's the north. And we need something similar for the south. And it should be diametrically opposed to what we've drawn. So we're going to press the small circle tool again. We'll go to select center and radius. And the way you do that is you take whatever value you put for latitude and make it negative. So you flip it to the other hemisphere. Then for longitude add 180 to the longitude. And this in this case 139. 81. I think. And then we keep everything else the same. We can go for preview and we should see a bunch of rings. How delightful. Let's close that. Let's go to rectangular view. Great. This looks antipodal to me. Create features. Same stick as it was before. Right. Auroral region. Done. It's simply a matter of exporting this and throwing it back into Photoshop. You know, creating a key. Color coding each jazz. And got yourself one auroral map. And if you're not happy with where this is positioned, you can simply move the geomagnetic pole. And then this area, this wave, this sort of sine wave looking thing will move around the planet, which I think is really cool. And you can really design where you want these things to go.

Right. That's what I think is done. We've mapped our Northern and Southern Lights. Talked a little bit about fog and we've mapped the summer northern hemisphere thunderstorms and the winter northern hemisphere thunderstorms. Join me next time where we'll continue to follow Madeleine's methodology. Exploring our winds, and our dust storms, and our sand storms, and snow storms, and polar vortices, and all of those delightfully destructive weather things. Hope you'll join me. So thanks for watching. Thank you to Madeleine for writing her fantastic worldbuilding guide. Thank you to RossBayGeo for their continued geographical advice. We've spent many hours discussing and editing these maps. Joy. Shout out to the patrons. Love you all! And until next time. Edgar out!
