# Rocks - Worldbuilder's Log 44

Good morning, Interweb. Worldbuilder's Log 44. We are, as always, continuing to build our fictional planet here. Placeholder name CRETAK. And in this video we'll look at rocks, and we'll create a global map for rock distribution. There's a lot of heavy lifting to do here, so let's get right to it. As usual, I'll be loosely following Madeleine James's fantastic guide to rocks and minerals. Links in all the usual places.

And I'll start by trying to identify which areas of my modern continents were shallow seas in the past. This will be very useful to know going forward, so I'll get that out of the way, which happened initially. So, this is the modern world, and I'll scroll back through the tectonic history for a moment. Right. 1, 2, 3. Okay, if we go back to the supercontinent stage here, note that we have a major rifting event happening here. Followed by another rifting event here. Followed by another rifting event here leading to the first kind of major collision in that entire time period. And this collision starts happening at what? About 110 million years ago this collision started. Okay, all of this is noteworthy because if you have a bunch of rifting going on, we expect conditions to be warmer and sea levels to rise, resulting in shallow seas. And conversely, if we have a bunch of collisions going on or just very large collisions, as is about to happen here, we expect the opposite: that conditions get cooler and sea levels drop. It seems to me that 110 million years ago, just before the start of this giant collision, we were at the peak of shallow seas. We've gone through millions and millions of years of tons of rifting, plenty of time for shallow seas to accumulate.

Excellent. Let's note that. So about 80 to 90 million years ago on Earth, we saw a period of sea level rise where we had a whole bunch of shallow seas. How delightful. Sea level was between 150 to 200 meters higher than it is today during this period. So let's simulate that in our world just for ease, because I'm not calculating all of that. So if we zoom in on a planet here, the first two green colors here, this shade and this shade, represent from 0 to 200 meters. On this planet, I'll say that everything of this color was underwater 110 million years ago. So, I won't do this on air, but I'll simply make a mask. Which looks like this.

Everything that's black was above sea level 110 million years ago. Everything that's not black was below sea level. And if you're going to go ahead and do this, be very careful just because some of your mountain ranges that might be very high in the modern world, like this shade here, might not have existed in the past. And that's why this wasn't colored black despite it being really high. Okay, we've done our shallow seas mask. This will be useful in a second just. Let's talk cratons. Quick summary. Cratons. They're kind of like continental nuclei, areas of continental crust that haven't experienced any tectonic disturbance for billions of years. They represent very ancient parts of Earth's crust. In my world, this is everything here with this gray color highlighted with this kind of neon colors. These are all cratons. On Earth, they look kind of like this. I think the most famous craton is the North American craton, the Canadian Shield as it's sometimes referred to as. So, cratons come in two sections, a basement section and a platform section.

Think basically of the basement section as rocks - like basement rocks - and the foundation rocks and the platform section as rocks above the basement. I'm sure there's a better explanation than that but I'm not a geologist. However, the main thing for us is that any time basement rock is on the surface, has been exposed to the surface, we refer to this section as a shield. In other words, cratons are composed of two parts, a platform section and a shield section. And we can see that here, if we go back to the North American craton here, and look at this map from Wikipedia. And this is the same area here. And you'll see you've got an orange area and a pink area. This is a shield area and a platform area.

Same thing with Baltica, I think that's what this craton here is called. You've got a shield area and you've got a platform area. And all cratons on Earth have this structure, the platform and the shield. Sometimes there's more shield and platform, and sometimes there's more platform than shield. But you always get this kind of of two components. So that's the structure of a craton.

We now need to know what rocks the shield is made of, and what rocks the platform is made of. The basement, or in our case, the shield area. Alpha craton will be made up of metamorphic and igneous rocks, especially granitic rocks. And the platform area will be made up of sediments or sedimentary rocks, which are for our purposes here sandstone and carbonate rocks and sediments. Igneous and metamorphic on the bottom, and sedimentary and sediments on top.

And if we look at rock distribution maps on Earth, you can see the same pattern. The green and pink here, metamorphic and granitic shield area. The platform area yellow and light yellow and orange. Sandstone, carbonates, and sediments. We check out the Baltica area - and I still don't think it's called Baltica. Surely it would be like the Scandinavian Shield. I don't know that geologists can correct me. Editor Edgar here, it's the East European craton. Same pattern though. Green and pink. Shield area. Metamorphic and granite. All the yellow and orange. Sandstone, carbonates, sediments. Platform. And the final thing to note here before we can properly map the cratons is that, as we noted earlier, the size of the shield area versus the platform area can vary.

So we need to figure out kind of guiding methodologies for measuring similar relative sizes. Now, I'm sure this is super complicated. If you were going to actually solve this properly, taking into account like different erosion systems, and deposition systems, and uplift, and climate effects on all these things. I won't get into that.

I'll try to make it nice and simple. And I think the easiest way I can illustrate this is if there's a lot of shield: S+. We would expect to see that in a highly eroded environment. Right? Makes sense. Right? You're eroding the platform section, exposing the shield section. And then, conversely, if there's barely any shield at all, this would be in a depositional environment.

Lots of deposition occurring. Lots of sediments can be deposited which can turn into sedimentary rocks over time, and so on, and so on. So I think it's worth getting into this with continuously considering. Am I - is there a lot of erosion going on? Is there going to be a lot of deposition going on? And as long as I kept that in mind, I think I should be able to place these cratonic areas, place rocks in these cratonic areas in a fairly reasonable manner.

So, yeah, that's the game plan. Let's do some analysis of the cratons to figure out what's going on. Oh, and we'll work on EZRI, here, in this video, because I've already worked on the other continents just to save a bit of time. Let's start — we have three cratons, one, two, and three. Let's start here because this is probably the easiest to figure out what's going on. We know from a previous video that during the last ice age, the ice sat approximately, very approximately, somewhere here, like this maximum ice extent. All of this section here, would have been covered by glaciers? And that means half of this craton was covered by glaciers.

And I imagine that as the ice retreats, it basically scratches the craton and exposes the shield area, just like I think what happened in North America. So maybe just a diagrammatic game plan. Maybe we say that this section here is shield area. And consequently, we'll say that the rest of the craton is platform.

Let's check our shallow seas map. We see that a large part of this was underwater. Since sediments are deposited underwater, especially marine sediments, so we get a lot of deposition happening here. And the last ice age would have happened after all of this deposition, so I think I'll keep this shield area exposed.

So I don't think there's any impact here. Now, in this craton we have deposition, marine deposition, happening on the gulf side. And we possibly have a lot of deposition happening off these mountains. So perhaps this entire section here, perhaps there's no shield area. All of it is platform. That's one way to play it. The other way to play it is to say it's so close to the big old mountain range that it's become twisted and contorted and deformed as a result of all this mountain building.

So perhaps it disappears completely. No craton here, so I'll leave that to future Edgar in the time-lapse to figure that out. Just two thoughts. Then finally we've got this cratonic beast happening here. Again, shallow seas. We've got a lot of deposition happening here. So I imagine. Yes. This entire section here is probably all platform.

And this section has the potential to be all shield. But this entire piece of land is a desert. And I think looking at what happens on Earth, here, there's a craton happening here, West African craton. And this might just be a coincidence, but it seems like the non-desert parts have exposed shield, while the desert parts are mostly all platform.

This makes me feel that maybe this should be best. Maybe I can sprinkle some small pockets of shield area just to break it up. So I think this is probably the plan for the cratons. So I'll go into time-lapse mode and mark the cratons according to everything we just discussed. So I'll see you in a bit.

Now, the eagle-eyed among you will note that I've left a whole bunch of gaps. What gives? These gaps here will be sediments. So things that haven't become proper rock yet. I've got a layer below everything else here set up with my sediment color. All of this will be filled in eventually, basically. And while we're on the subject of sediments, if we go to this little lake here, note that I deliberately don't fit it because obviously in the bottom of lakes, you get a whole bunch of sediments.

As we see from the Great Lakes region and others. And I think the only other thing to note before moving on, and to kind of remember if you're going to follow along, is that at a very rough approximation, 75% of Earth's surface is either sediments or sedimentary rocks, and the remaining 25% is metamorphic and igneous rocks.

Don't really be afraid of using the warmer colors here, like sandstones or carbonate rocks, or sediments, and so on. Okay, I think that's everything. So we should move on to large igneous provinces.

Right, large igneous provinces, we've talked about these before. These are areas of past intense volcanism that are dominated by, as the name suggests, igneous rocks. If we look at the large igneous province in India, for example, we see that the main component is basalt, which is kind of the dark color here. Now, fortunately, thanks to GPlates, we've already mapped all of our large igneous provinces.

These are the yellow areas here. So all I'm going to do now is fill in a bunch of basaltic rocks in the yellow areas. The only wrinkle is that the younger the large igneous province is, the more basaltic rocks I'll put there. The older it is, the less basaltic rocks. The idea is that over time, erosion starts taking place, and turning it into sediments, and so on. This is the first step, anyway, I'll see you on the other side and we'll talk about the second step.

Right! Happy with that. So this guy here is literally the youngest large igneous province in the world so I've kind of just basaltic rocked out. In contrast, this one is really old, so I've just put a small piece of basaltic rock. Also, you might have seen in the time-lapse that I added a bunch of basaltic rocks at hot spots. Here. Down to here. And even here.

And it's also worth noting that if there were any continental rifts happening in this continent, I'd add basaltic rocks there too. Ala East Africa rift here. But there isn't, so I can skip that step. And now we want to add some other types of igneous rocks, which are granitic rocks or andesitic rocks. Pink or purple on this map. According to Madeleine, there should be much less than basalt.

Basalt is like the main predominant rock type for this kind of of formation. But if we have a large igneous area near a subduction area or island arc, we should add some andesitic rocks, and larger amounts of acidic rocks, and if we have a large igneous area near hot spots, we should throw in more rhyolitic rocks. Rhyolitic and granite - we'll use those two terms interchangeably. And that's what I'm going to do now. Time-lapse mode engaged. Okay, something like this. Just a touch. Nothing crazy.

I ended up adding just a bit of andesitic rock here just for variety, because there's no relevant hot spots which would be very heavy in this continent. So I dropped it there for demonstration purposes. And with that large igneous provinces are done.

For mountains, remember that we have four types of mountains according to Worldbuilding Pasta's method. Links in all the usual places. Laramide, Andean, Himalayan, and Ural. I've listed here a kind of the distinctive rock types associated with each. So we're going to go through each of the four and kind of draw them. So let's start with the Laramide. As a quick recap, Laramide mountains are subduction zone mountain formation where the oceanic plate is subducted particularly quickly or perhaps a range of mid-ocean hills is subducted, and resulting in a very thick and wide mountain formation. The classic example here is the Rocky Mountains. Now the large igneous province here doesn't hold up, you can kind of see it. There's a whole bunch of purple color which are andesitic igneous rocks. Basically to spam sites in the Rocky Mountains in the world. So, give me a minute here to do a quick recap of the history of this continent.

Right. So there are two areas of Laramide here where a substantial subduction of a range of mid-ocean hills took place over time, and that's here and here. And these sections here. And remember also that the closer the color to white here, the older the mountain range is, and thus the more eroded it is. So I'll spam andesitic rocks massively in the younger mountain ranges.

These two here. Less so here. Less again here. And least of all this kind of white section here. The idea is that a lot of erosion would have happened, so we'll find more and more sediments or sedimentary rocks. This is the basic stick. Very simple. Time-lapse mode engaged.

Laramide, done! Or at least the andesitic part of the Laramide is done. Next, Andean mountains. Andean mountains will have a larger granite component. And in general, this makes sense. Andesite, granite, igneous rocks, volcanoes. We would expect this in ocean-continent convergent areas. So if we jump over to the Andes mountains, we can see here the pink rocks, the granitic rocks, much more than we saw in the Rocky Mountains.

But more importantly, it's not the only type of rock. We've got sediments and sandstone and andesite and granite and metamorphic and the works. It's just that there's more granitic rocks going on. And for this, I hardly need to look at my history. Basically, all of these thin young mountain ranges are in my recent subduction areas. They're all Andean mountains, so I'll put a bunch of granite rocks there. Time-lapse mode engaged.

Right. Andean mountain formation complete! Now, you might have seen me spray a whole bunch of this island here. This is all Madeleine. Apparently, there's more andesite in island arcs. To be honest with you, I don't really know why, but this is clear if we look at Indonesia here, a whole bunch of purple, a whole bunch of andesite.

Also, this is slightly Laramide here because there was a range of mid-ocean hills being subducted. And that's why this island looks kind of fat. Same deal here. This is a little bit Laramide. So I stuck in a bunch of andesite. Right, that's subduction zone mountain formation, at least for now. Let's do some continental mountain formation.

So, we'll do both at the same time because they're really similar. Continental continental collisions, and there's not a lot of volcanism so we don't expect igneous rocks. We'd expect the other two types of rocks/sediments metamorphic and sedimentary. So for Himalayan mountains, we go to the Himalayas. Things to note here along the boundary here we have a lot of metamorphic rocks, and on the other side of the plateau we've got kind of, I think, kind of a ring of metamorphic rock with a bunch of sandstone and carbonate rocks and sediments in the kind of plateau. I think the carbonate rocks here are uplifted marine sediments.

Just Himalayan mountains will look to mimic that. And for the Urals, we'll go to the Ural mountains, horror shock. Same basic deal here along the mountain range there's a bunch of metamorphic rocks. And again, note the carbonate rocks or uplifted marine sediments or marine sedimentary rocks. So any remaining EZRI mountains that we haven't already classified, will be continental. Just like with the Laramide mountains, the closer to white, the more I'll bias things towards sediments and sedimentary rocks due to more erosion happening. So back to the blender, and yes, let's map.

The last thing to do is to add kind of finishing touches. Like, remember Andean mountain formation. There's a whole bunch of other rock types, not just granite there. I'll go through, and I'll spray a bunch of metamorphic rocks everywhere. In the absence of rhyolitic rocks, I'll add a few, and so on. This step is taking a look at the Earth's rock maps and striving to mimic them.

And the other thing I should have done in large igneous provinces, but I completely forgot, around large igneous provinces like that, it's useful to add a whole bunch of metamorphic rocks because metamorphic rocks are rocks that form, or I think they're formed, under intensive pressure or heat conditions. Bunch of heat here. So the large igneous province kicks off and transforms a whole bunch of bordering rocks into metamorphic.

So, yes, I'll enhance all the mountain ranges and metamorphic rocks around the large igneous provinces.

Right. Great. So we're now on the home stretch. We just need to go fill in our lowland areas. These areas will be exclusively filled with sediments or sedimentary rocks. And if you go to Madeleine's guide, you'll find she has a bunch of wonderful tips on where to place each type of rock. I'll deviate here, which might be a dangerous move.

We'll see how it goes. But I'd like to simplify things just a touch. So I'll follow this chart here. I'll try to make sure that 75% of my land surface is covered with sediments or sedimentary rocks. And I'll make sure that I have more sediment areas than sandstone areas and more sandstone areas than carbonate areas.

And as a general guiding principle, I'll try to bias carbonate rock areas towards the areas of previous shallow seas. Sandstone towards non-shallow marine areas and sediments in lowland basins - foreland basins, rift basins etc. This is definitely not a hard and fast rule but kind of a guiding principle that can be violated based on what the geography of my planet tells me.

And again studying rock distribution maps on Earth. Now, quick foreland basins and rift basins. Just like the prompt, if you have a rift valley, the small basins, or sometimes large basins can be filled with sediments or sedimentary rocks, as you can see here in East Africa. And foreland basins occur when you have a large mountain range.

And this mountain range is necessarily very heavy, so it pushes down on the crust surrounding the mountain range, creating basins on both sides. And you can see here in the Himalayas that you've got a bunch of sediments in these basins. Same thing with the Andes mountains here. Basically, this entire area here is a foreland basin. And you see that we've got a bunch of sediments, and some sandstone, and so on. So, yes, let's do this.

Right. Rock map. Finished. And as always, it took longer than expected. Here it is in 2D. And yeah, I don't think this looks too terrible. Now, if you're interested, you can continue with Madeleine's method and map the rock types on the ocean floor. You'll eventually end up with something that looks like this. Very beautiful. But I won't do that here just because I know that whatever cultures I place in this world, they won't interact with the ocean floor at all, so I can just save myself a little bit of time.

So I hope you'll join me next time where we take this basic rock map and use it to figure out where our ore deposits are. Thank you very much for watching. Thank you to the channel's patrons for their support. Shout to Madeleine for her fantastic and wonderful guide. Oh, it's December, happy holidays to everyone. And until next time! Edgar out.