# Fuel & The Copper Age - Worldbuilder's Log 45

good morning it web War Builders log 45
we are as always continuing to war build
our fictional Planet here placeholder
name creac and in today's video we are
going to map our copper age or deposits
Loosely following melin James's
wonderful deposits and gemology links in
all the usual places I would highly
recommend reading the blog before
continuing with this video so assuming
you've done that let's get started
so Step One is fuel sources this won't
be massively relevant for the copper age
but it will be relevant for future
videos so it's worth kind of getting it
over with now I say now actually I did
this all off camera to save a little bit
of time but I would like to talk through
it because a I think it's kind of cool
and B it my method differs ever so
slightly from meline so it's kind of
it's worth discussing so first up is
Pete it ended up looking like this here
are my Pete LS or at least here are my
most important Pete LS I got this by
making a selection of all of my
subarctic climates all of my non- dry
summer continental climates and all of
my non- dry summer temper climates then
I brought up the ice sheets during my
last ice age and anywhere where this
brown region and this white region
intersected became my modern pons like
so okay fuel Source 2 W ended up looking
like this now Madeline uses her biom map
to predict where her Forest will be I do
not have a biome map so I had to do
something different and what I ended up
doing after much much research was to
use these numbers here on the Wikipedia
page for tree line that is on creac
between 30° north and south the tree
line is at 4,000 M that is below 4,000 m
in elevation there are trees above 4,000
m in elevation there are no trees and
then for the next 20° of latitude
poleward that tree line drops by 130 m
per degree of latitude and then by 75 m
per degree of latitude until the tree
line drops to zero I there's no trees
regardless of elevation that is what
this zone is depicting albeit I cut out
all of my arid climates my hot and cold
deserts and my hot and cold steps no
trees in arid regions or at least not
very many of them and I cut out all
Tundra and all ice cap regions no trees
on the ice now I will be the first to
admit that this zone is far from perfect
there's a bunch of considerations I'm
just not making here but at first glance
I'm not too displeased with how it looks
and we can always fangle it later if we
run into some
issues okay so H given that coal uh
ultimately drives from decaying plant
matter I had to make some calls as to
what's going on on with the sort of
timeline of Life on this planet so here
is the story I came up with let's say
prior to 450 million years ago plants
invaded the land and then at 450 million
years ago here we have this large ignas
Province pop off let's say that that
triggers a mass extinction event let's
say that that mass extinction event is
pretty bad for the oceans we could
invoke like large scale ocean
acidification for example and that would
give any Critters in the ocean the sort
of incentive to get the hell out of
there so we'll say a little while later
at say uh 425 million years ago the
critters will have truly invaded the
land so animals colonize the land at 425
million years ago I like this for two
reasons one the continents are in a
super continent configuration makes for
super easy proliferation great time to
come on to land and two 425 million
years of terrestrial evolution is not
too dissimilar to Earth so the time
depth is kind of I'm comfortable with
that time depth so yeah the animals will
proliferate and they'll keep doing so
until about 360 million years ago here
where there's another big old large
ignes Province triggers another mass
extinction Shenanigans occur so we're
essentially going plants lares Province
animals lares Provence all gravy now
creac is super earthlike therefore it's
reasonable to assume that it would have
underwent a Carboniferous period much
like Earth and it was during Earth's
Carboniferous period that a whole bunch
of cold swamps occur that ultimately
gave rise to our modern coal deposits if
we assume a sort of similar time scale
to Earth then I reckon we should say
that the start of our Carboniferous
period here on CAC should occur about
here 340 million years ago and will
continue to about 280 million years ago
and what's kind of really cool and
serendipitous about this kind of time
slot is that there's a bucketload of
rifting going on lots of rifting lots of
seise great opportunity to form lots of
nice cold swamps so for me this whole
timeline works out just so beautifully
so I decided to go with that uh went
back to the start of my Carboniferous
this is what we're looking at and I
dropped in a whole bunch of these blue
areas here to indicate my cold swamps so
what I was looking for was any sort of
low-lying wet region between about 0 and
45° North and South give or take a bonus
if that region was around a mountain
range because a whole bunch of sediments
from those mountains could in the future
bury our coal swamps help make coal Etc
that's the configuration I chose based
on what's going on during my
Carboniferous and then you let the
animation run and hey Presto we have a
whole bunch of modern coal deposits
delightful so I took those Boos into
Photoshop and anywhere where our kind of
old coal swamps became modern-day
mountain ranges I marked the regions in
Black to indicate a high concentration
of coal these are likely going to be
like crx's primary coal deposits for the
remaining areas I mark them in in Gray
but only in regions of sedimentary rock
that would be this sort of uh mustardy
yellow and really pale yellow here this
is per melin's guide these gray regions
will kind of be lesser quality coal more
sporadic coal Etc and the final thing I
did was AR all coal areas from large
ignes Province areas if those large
ignes provinces popped off after the
coal swamps formed uh so check it out we
got this bad boy here much coal very
swamp very good he's taking along and
then eventually if I'm not mistaken a
large ignes Province should pop off
there we go so what's going on here is
that any coal or Pete or anything that
formed in these cold swamps will
essentially get nuked by the large ignes
Province all that vulcanism will
vaporize the deposit hence why no coal
in these regions and that my friend is
the story of how creac got its coal so
we got our Pete we got our wood and we
got our coal let the copper age
commence okay so it wouldn't be much of
a copper R without copper so uh let's
start there specifically let's start
with uh marking out our copper rich
areas areas where there be the highest
con concentration of copper ore this is
super easy this region correlates
basically to our young active mountain
ranges and our older inactive mountain
ranges I'm going to ignore any mountains
generated by large IES provinces
Continental Rifts and
hotspots something like like that now
two points here uh one you want to be
generous so try and capture the entire
kind of deformation area of uh an
orogenic region not just the highest
points and two age matters so young
mountains active mountains I just
blanket fill them in as copper rich but
older mountains that are subject to
erosion I was not so gungho the idea
being that the older mountain range the
more it's eroded the more any copper
deposits that may have been present will
just get yeated so this chap here this
White Band here and this little island
here this is a super super old mountain
range so I've only included what is that
like three four little spots of copper
essentially this mountain range has been
stripped of its copper resources or all
but stripped of its copper
resources so now that we have our copper
rich areas in let's start working on
Native copper so native copper is going
to be really important for copper age
people for three reasons one it is or
was very abundant h two it's found near
the surface so it's very accessible and
three most importantly of all you can
cold work native copper so you don't
need to have unlocked smelting on the
tech Tree in order to work native copper
super useful for copper AG boils so we
have uh many different types of native
copper deposits and we're going to start
with Native Copper from phalor deposits
to explain imagine we have some sort of
Upland region and then a basin and
inside Upland region we have a whole
bunch of little bits of ore then we got
some water coming into the system this
water then H takes these bits of ore
transports it deposits it and
concentrates it in the Basin faor
deposit or in more general terms this is
a uh Mississippi Valley type deposit so
in our case here our kind of Upland
region is going to be our basaltic large
ignes provinces and the copper deposits
will be deposited in the carbonate
sedimentary rock around the basaltic
large ignes provinces so we got our
large ignes provinces and then I'm going
to draw on my rock map where I've have
highlighted just my bassal regions in
sort of dark mauve and by carbonate Rock
regions in light yellow just to add to
madin stuff here I'm going to say in
addition to the large ignes provinces
I'm also going to say that uh hot spots
on land are going to be involved with
this fail or deposit step because like
what is a hot spot if not just a very
small large ignas provits most of these
type of deposits will be poor deposits
and once in the Blue Moon we might get a
moderate deposit pretty simple let's -
lapse this up
oh now here we got some interesting
stuff happening uh this large ignes
Province here it is so old all the
bassal has been eroded away so this step
the pH or deposit step won't apply in
this Zone that's the first thing and
then the other thing here uh we got all
these hot spots happening here I would
very much like to put some fatal
deposits in carbonet rock around these
hot spots but unfortunately I did not
Mark any of them in so uh all things are
mutable uh in World building so what I'm
going to do is I'm going to include my
sediment layer and just throw in some
phor deposits in the sediment there
pretending that I marked in carbon of
rock there back in the Rocks
video okay um that is super hard to see
so uh hopefully this is better yes it is
so those are my uh poor grade phor
deposits on j h now what I'm going to do
is I'm going to choose maybe one or two
of these and upgrade them to moderate
grade color them in in a different
color I I know it's super hard to see
but uh there's a mod one here and
there's a mod one here fail or deposits
done okay next up we got native copper
secondarily enriched from VMS deposits
now there is just so much to explain in
this step so uh please bear with me so
VMS here stands for uh voluptuous Marine
stuff no no it doesn't I joke it stands
for volcanogenic massive sulfide
deposits and these essentially occur as
a result of a submarine volcanism think
hydrothermal vents black smokers on the
ocean floor that kind of thing now
they're about as useful as a rain coat
on a fish uh for copper AG Boos because
ain't no mining going to be occurring on
the sea floor in order for this to be in
any way useful we have to get the VMS
deposits from the seaf Flor onto land
and we do this via collisions any sort
of collisions continent continent
continent island arc microc continents
whatever point is two hunks of land come
together necessarily there's going to be
a bit of intervening ocean in between
them if there's uh VMS deposits present
they can get uplifted into the ensuing
mountain range and hey Presto we got VMS
deposits on land happy copper R boil so
essentially to find out where VMS
deposits go we have to look at the
collisional history of our orogenic
regions for our old mountains it's an
no-brainer VMS deposits can be placed
here and here because they formed
necessarily as a result of continent
content collisions active subduction
zone mountain ranges though are a little
trickier so let me just scroll back
through to
history okay so here this is protal
Northern Jenner and it's about to be
smacked with this island arc chain
here so we have a collisional history
going on up here in the north and that's
about it I see no other collisions
happening along
here yeah collisional history here in
this region no collisional history down
here although I'm going to temper that
slightly um apparently VMS deposits on
land are also linked to uh areas of slab
roll back and back AR basins and all
that sort of jazz I don't know why
exactly but this is an area of slab back
and we got a back Arc Bas in here so
just to kind of hedge things just to
cover all of my bases here I'm going to
say that maybe this VMS region extends
from about here all the way down to here
but nothing south of that yeah I like
that now again we're not looking for the
VMS deposits themselves we're looking
for secondary enrichment of the VMS
deposits so much like the last step with
failers we're we're looking at some sort
of water being around either meteoric or
ground water doesn't really matter that
water takes the ore from the V deposit
and concentrates it in an adjacent
region specifically the VMS deposits
themselves will be in ous rock regions
so andesite and riy to be particular and
the secondary enrichment of those VMS
deposits will occur most commonly in
adjacent Sandstone regions this sort of
light yellow here but as always I'm more
than willing to Chuck it into sediment
regions the orange region here because
I'm using sediments as a kind of
catchall cool so we're done we can
totally get mapping turns out yeah no
not yet buddy apparently too much water
is a bad thing I again I'm not a
geologist I don't really know why I
think maybe it's just that if there's
constant water knocking around the
erosion is too great and it just nukes
to deposit completely so in order to
counteract that effect I made this black
region here so what this is this is a
selection of all of my tropical to
subtropical climate zones that are not
wet year round namely these boils and as
a further constraint secondary doesn't
really occur too much when uh
precipitation Falls in its solid form
snow so I took everything that was 6°
Celsius or cooler in Winter and
subtracted it from this selection
leaving me basically with all my
subtropical and tropical climate zones
that aren't wet year round and where the
chance of snow is almost nil and with
that we're ready to go we just need to
throw in some poor deposits and some
moderate deposits
there's the final set and if we add in
our filer deposits we're now looking at
this distribution of ores uh next up
let's look at arsenical
Copper so arsenical copper is a
naturally occurring uh alloy of copper
mercifully the constraints aren't too
bad here copper rich areas around coal
and in carbonate sedimentary rock in
previous shallow Seas we have all of
that marked out so I'm just going to go
ahead and make a selection that
encompasses all of those and where
applicable I'll drop in a small amount
of poor richness deposits and every once
in a blue run I'll stick in a moderate
richness deposit
okay those are my arsenical copper
regions and if we add to this the other
copper regions we already mapped we get
this how
delightful and the very last thing for
copper is rare native copper this is
just trow in a couple of moderate
richness regions in our copper rich
areas dead easy this is very much a
Vibes based artistic license Step at
least in my eyes
okay that's it for copper we got our
failer deposits the VMS stuff arenic
copper and Native copper so now we're
going to move on to
Silver oh wait no sorry not silver gold
we need to do gold first my bad uh we
all know what gold is analog bit coin
we're going to begin uh by mapping some
aluvial Placer deposits so to explain we
are going to find a whole bunch of gold
Rich sediments in our mountainous
regions specifically in our active
mountain ranges the gold Rich sediment
will be present in ritic or andesitic
ous Rock regions and in our inactive
mountain ranges just basically wherever
just the key thing here is age the older
the inactive mountain range is the less
gold deposits will be there any in any
case we'll have a whole bunch of gold Rd
sediment in our uh mountains weathering
will occur and that gold will be washed
Downstream and collected in our current
major rivers or potential uh fossil
Rivers forming aluvial Placer deposits
think panning for gold that kind of jazz
uh most of these deposits are going to
be of moderate richness but we'll get
some very rich deposits in areas of
previous receding glaciation and in
mountainous areas with a bunch of high
precipitation pretty straightforward so
let's uh let's bling out janor shall we
okay uh those are some of my gold
deposits added to the Copper deposits
our map now looks like this two things
here uh firstly my area of uh previous
receding glaciation actually wasn't that
gold friendly to begin with it's
basically just a bunch of flat land so
viable gold deposits up in the north
here kind of aren't it and the other
thing here this is a large EES Province
there's so much uh ritic and anistic
rock going on here that I I might just
put in one or two gold deposits in this
large IG Province even though I just
said just work with orogenies yeah let
me try that I can always erase it later
just uh touch here and there nothing too
crazy okay this next gold step here I'm
not going to do it all this is here to
mimic a region in South Africa around
Johannesburg called the fit f which is
this really interesting incredibly uh
gold Rich area of the world mine talks
about in the blog so go check it out if
you're interested the thing is the wi FS
round is kind of like a one-off anomaly
it takes a really convoluted set of
circumstances to occur in order to
produce something like the vid FS Rand
and I I basically never include oneoff
Earth anom in fictional worlds so we'll
be eating this step and moving on to
laterite
deposits all right before we talk Lite
deposits we're going to need to talk
greenstone belts Madeline's blog covers
what exactly greenstone belts are I'm
not going to go into the details the
explain like M5 version here is that
there areas of a bunch of green rock
with a particular kind of cool structure
going on I'm just going to focus on the
ne to NOS the ne to NOS here are that
they are or that they can be very
mineral and or regions that occur in
cratons these fellas here or
specifically at the edge of cratons uh
they form in the deep deep deep past way
before our simulation so we're at
Liberty to drop in greenstone belts
basically along any edge of a Craton
complete artistic license
here okay so the black line here is just
an outline of the Katon the green line
here delineates the uh greenstone belt
area I tried to put in a couple in
Shield regions where we have IGN as a
metamorphic rock and a couple in
platform regions where we only have
sediments or sedimentary rock so with
greenstone belts in now we can talk
laterite deposits proper these are or
deposits that form in leeched soil the
idea being that water comes along and
strips the soil of uh soluble stuff
leaving behind only insoluble stuff like
iron aluminium oxide and in our case
some gold now mine said that these occur
along greenstone belts in warm tropical
climates I broadly agree I would just
extend this a little bit to say that it
should be along greenstone belts in warm
non wet year round tropical climates uh
because in order for the sort of
chemical weathering to occur to create
laterite deposits uh you need to
alternate between dry periods periods of
evaporation and wet periods so like you
evaporate all the soluble stuff up to
the surface during a dry period wet
period comes washes it all away
evaporate wash away evaporate wash away
hey Presto laterite deposit so that
means we're going to use uh this Zone
that we used previously except that I'm
only going to be looking at stuff inside
of uh my Tropics something like that so
basically anywhere where this uh black
Zone overlaps our greenstone belts we
can drop in some gold laterite deposits
time lapse mode engaged oh and we're
going to go sparing here and these
deposits are going to be of poor grade
okay maybe just something like that oh
boy that's really hard to see but it's
worth pointing out that this is a shield
region here so I'm assuming these gold
deposits would be just more accessible
than like these gold deposits here which
we buried under a bunch of sediment so
these may not be accessible to our
copper AG boils I'm not entirely sure
about that
though and let's finish up with gson so
this one's pretty simple gosson it's a
it's another type of secondary
enrichment but really all we're doing
here is just marking in Gold heavy VMS
deposits so where we had previously
determined VMS deposits to be viable in
the copper stage we're just going to go
through there find any ous provinces
ritic or andesitic rock in those regions
and drop in a couple of gold heavy VMS
deposits some of them poor once in a
blue moon will make a rich one pretty
simple
cool so those are gosin rich and poor
Lites common place or gold so all our
gold and added to the Copper how
delightful onto Silver for real this
time silver we all know what it is
useful for fending off vampires cool
thing about this is that uh we can kind
of speedrun things a little bit here
because lots of this just Builds on what
we've already done like for example gson
we just mapped our gold gossin so now
all we're going to do we're just going
to put in some silver deposits alongside
those gold gossin some poor rarely Rich
dead
easy okay something like that so then
we're going to throw in some silver from
epithermal vein deposits and these are
deposits that form inside uh the magma
chamber so we're looking at plac in most
of these in our young volcanically
active mountains along our subduction
zones uh and we're going to place them
in uh ous Rock regions therein but we
can throw in one or two in Old mountains
perhaps these deposits uh have been
exposed uh by
erosion that's silver step one done
copper gold nice
map step here is silver in like
secondary enrichment zones nothing to
discuss here because this is the exact
same constraint we had earlier remember
when we marked in uh Native Copper from
secondarily enriched VMS deposits this
is the exact same thing except instead
of marking in Copper we Mark in some
silver I guess the only difference here
and note the liberal use of the word
rare we don't want to go too ham with
this uh particular silver deposit to
just a couple of poor deposits a couple
of moderate deposits in out job
done yeah so very little there like four
dots that's it secondary enrichment
silver gossin gold copper
delightful okay the end is in sight
we're on our final step placers of
phalor sediments we've already talked
about placers in the Gold section we
talked about phalor deposits in the
copper section we just put these two
things together so these Des sediments
again few and far between will go down
river of carbonate sedimentary rock
around basaltic large ous provinces so
in other words here is a large ous
Province there's the bassal let's
imagine we got some silver deposits in
faor sediments here the rivers will take
said deposits and concentrate them
Downstream in a place or deposit bassal
sediment Downstream silver dead easy
okay those are our failer placers
secondary enrichment silver silver from
goson all of our gold all of our copper
final or map well I guess kind of we got
this rifting Zone going on here and it's
kind of conspicuously or or is kind of
conspicuously absent in this region so I
feel like I want to drop something in
here I don't know what exactly I'm going
to do so I'm just going to go Rogue and
do something and talk about it later but
I think with some additions here I think
that'll be us properly
done okay that feels a little bit better
not entirely sure how I'm justifying
these other than hand waving saying ah
they're a product of some sort of
volcanism along this
Rift and with that copper a
done now a couple of things to point out
here uh firstly people of a broadly
copper aged tech level will be able to
use other metals madlin points out tin
and lead as examples we're not going to
map those uh we're just going to focus
on the most important ones copper gold
silver the second thing just want
everyone to bear in mind these deposits
represent only the ones accessible by
people of a copper age tech level this
is not all the copper deposits on this
world or all the gold deposits or all
the silver deposits and thirdly uh Eagle
eyed amongst you will have noticed that
there's not a single thing filled out on
ezri uh that's because I'd like to flesh
out ezri in real time on a stream here
on this channel for everyone to view and
I'll be looking to do that in the days
following this video's release not
exactly sure when but links will be
posted in the usual places and yeah stay
tuned all right awesome um thanks for
being everyone for watching massive
thanks to patrons for keeping the lights
on shout out meline for the wonderful
guide links in US places and also Shout
Out World building pasta links IND usual
places spoilers he's got a thing on ores
cooking and he was kind enough to share
some uh unpublished information that I
used throughout this video so just top
block amazing stuff yeah and with that
until until the Bronze
Age it gross